 
 
UNIVERSITI TEKNOLOGI MARA 
 
 
 
 
 
READALERT: A GAMIFIED MOBILE 
APP FOR TRACKING READING 
PROGRESS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MUHAMMAD HAIKAL BIN NOROL SHAHRI 
 
 
 
 
 
BACHELOR OF COMPUTER SCIENCE (HONS.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JANUARY 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Universiti Teknologi MARA 
 
 
 
ReadAlert: A Gamified Mobile App For 
Tracking Reading Progress 
 
 
 
Muhammad Haikal Bin Norol Shahri 
 
 
 
 
Report submitted in fulfilment of the requirements 
for Bachelor of Computer Science (Hons.) 
Faculty of Computer and Mathematical Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JANUARY 2026 
 
 
 
i 
 
SUPERVISOR APPROVAL 
 
 
READALERT: A GAMIFIED MOBILE APP FOR TRACKING READING 
PROGRESS 
 
By 
 
MUHAMMAD HAIKAL BIN NOROL SHAHRI 
2023699086 
 
This report was prepared under the supervision of the supervisor, Madam Lily Marlia 
Binti Abdul Latif. It was submitted to the Faculty of Computer and Mathematical 
Sciences and was accepted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Bachelor of Computer Science (Hons.) 
 
 
 
Approved by 
 
 
 
…………………………………… 
Madam Lily Marlia Binti Abdul Latif  
Project Supervisor 
 
 
JANUARY 23, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii 
 
STUDENT DECLARATION 
 
 
I certify that this report and the project to which it refers is the product of my own 
work and that any idea or quotation from the work of other people, published or 
otherwise are fully acknowledged in accordance with the standard referring of the 
discipline. 
 
 
 
…………………………………… 
Muhammad Haikal Bin Norol Shahri 
2023699086 
 
 
 
JANUARY 23, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
CONTENT                                                                                      PAGE 
 
SUPERVISOR APPROVAL i 
STUDENT DECLARATION ii 
LIST OF FIGURES v 
LIST OF TABLES vi 
 
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION  
 
        1.1   Background of Study 1 
        1.2   Problem Statement 3 
        1.3   Project Objectives 4 
        1.4   Project’s Scope 4 
        1.5   Significance 6 
        1.6   Conclusion 7 
 
CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW  
 
         2.1   Overview of Reading 9 
             2.1.1 Type of Reading Material 10 
         2.2   Overview of Gamification 14 
             2.2.1 Type of Gamification 15 
             2.2.2 Game Elements 17 
         2.3   Overview Of Recommendation System 20 
             2.3.1 Machine Learning 21 
         2.4   Existing Applications 24 
             2.4.1 Bookmory 24 
             2.4.2 PagePots 25 
             2.4.3 Habitica 26 
             2.4.4 Comparison of Existing Applications 27 
         2.5   Justification on Game Elements 29 
iv 
 
          2.6   Conclusion 31 
 
CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY  
 
         3.1    Project Methodology 33 
              3.1.1 Phase 1: Identification 35 
              3.1.2 Phase 2: Design 36 
              3.1.3 Phase 3: Development 39 
              3.1.4 Phase 4: Prototyping 40 
              3.1.5 Phase 5: Testing 41 
         3.2    Summary of Project Methodology 42 
         3.3    System Architecture 44 
         3.4    Hardware and Software Requirements 47 
              3.4.1 Hardware Requirements 47 
              3.4.2 Software Requirements 48 
         3.5    Conclusion 49 
 
REFERENCES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
 
FIGURE                                                                                                              PAGE 
2.1     Concept Map For ReadAlert 8 
2.2     Bookmory Interfaces 25 
2.3     PagePots Interfaces 26 
2.4     Habitica Interfaces 27 
3.1     Mobile Application Development Life Cycle (MADLC) Phases   34 
3.2     Wireframe Storyboard Design for User Interface (UI) 38 
3.3     System Architecture 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vi 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
 
TABLE                                                                                                                PAGE 
2.1     Comparison of Existing Applications And ReadAlert 28 
3.1     Identification Phase         36 
3.2     Design Phase 37 
3.3     Development Phase 40 
3.4     Prototyping Phase 41 
3.5     Testing Phase 42 
3.6     Summary of Project Methodology 43 
3.7     Hardware Requirements 47 
3.8     Software Requirements 48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
This chapter introduces the ReadAlert: Gamified Mobile Application For Tracking 
Reading Progress, highlighting its purpose, background, and the need for a gamified 
solution to improve reading motivation. It outlines the study’s background, objectives, 
scope, and significance to show how the proposed system promotes engagement and 
organized reading habits. Finally, the chapter concludes with an overview of how the 
application supports consistent reading behaviour and lifelong learning. 
 
1.1 Background of Study 
 
Reading is one of the key factors in the process of knowledge, the development 
of critical thinking abilities, and promoting the process of self-directed 
development. However, maintaining a regular reading routine is a ubiquitous 
problem especially in the modern digital environment where distractions are 
rampant. Mobile technology has offered an easily accessible channel of 
promoting reading habits by inclusion of applications that make it interactive 
and accessible in learning. Gamification is one of the strategies that are used; 
in this case, different elements, including tiers, badges, and points, are 
incorporated to make ordinary tasks more interest based. This combination of 
the educational and entertainment features has proven to increase the 
motivation and the participation of the user (Anggrainy et al., 2024). 
 
 
Several studies have explored the use of gamification to stimulate reading and 
motivational dynamics. Li et al. (2024) noted that mobile gamified experiences 
produce long-term learning behaviours and improve user engagement over 
time. Similarly, Nursi et al. (2025) highlighted the significance of tracking 
progress in enhancing self-directed learning and user satisfaction, in general, 
in mobile education environments. Meng et al. (2024) have stated that effective 
2 
 
gamified elements improve the user engagement and retention in the web-
based learning programs. Although these were very promising results, existing 
studies have been mainly focused on formal education and not on personal 
reading habits and informal learning and, as such, reflect a gap that can be 
exploited to investigate the gamification of personal reading progress 
monitoring and the continuum between academic reading and leisure reading. 
 
 
Existing reading cataloguing software are mostly primitive form of data 
logging applications that lack any incentive elements that can keep a user 
interested in the software. Wang et al. (2024) observe that the lack of interactive 
or motivational features regularly results in a user disengagement in the long 
term. Oliveira et al. (2024) also emphasize that the inadequately integrated 
gamification designs may suppress the long-term engagement and 
involvement. As a result, many readers become alienated by their reading goals 
or quit books halfway, fostering discontinuous habits of reading. All these gaps 
result in the need to have a platform that could effectively manage the reading 
lists and encourage its users to continue reading with the help of gamified 
progress and incentives. 
 
 
The elaboration of a mobile reading tracker gamification has scholarly 
significance, as it is part of the growing body of information on gamification 
in educational technology and mobile devices. Socially, this kind of initiative 
instils reading culture and lifelong learning among students and adults. In 
practice, it provides users with an effective tool that is easy to use to track 
progress, stay organized, and remain motivated. The integration of gamified 
design principles in reading applications aligns with current educational 
technology trends that emphasize engagement, personalization, and self-
development (Li et al., 2024; Nursi et al., 2025). 
 
 
3 
 
The current paper fills the motivation gap that is present in the current reading-
tracking frameworks by suggesting a mobile app that combines gamification 
and progress monitoring. The project aims at changing the traditional reading 
records into the interactive process and, therefore, promote regular reading and 
the visualization of user progress. This objective directly presents the major 
objectives of the project, which are to design, develop, and test a gamified 
mobile application to increase reading motivation and organizational 
effectiveness. 
 
1.2 Problem Statement 
 
Ideally, readers should possess both the motivation and effective tools to 
sustain regular reading habits. A structured mobile system would allow users 
to record their progress, track completed books, and gain satisfaction from 
measurable achievements. This type of system could encourage users to 
maintain discipline and enjoyment while reading consistently. 
 
 
As a matter of fact, most readers become demotivated halfway through, forget 
what they have read or give up their goals altogether. The currently available 
mobile catalogue or reading apps usually offer simple record-keeping 
capabilities with no interactive or motivational elements. It has been noted that 
the conventional reading apps do not always keep the user interested due to the 
lack of effective feedback systems (Anggrainy et al., 2024). On the same note, 
Wang et al. (2024) indicated that the gamification in learning tools is often 
implemented at a small scale, which results in less engagement in the long-
term. Oliveira et al. (2024) also observed that the ability to incorporate the 
elements of a game is among the key issues to consider in the context of mobile 
app design to ensure that the user is engaged in the process continuously. 
 
 
In case of low motivation and engagement, users are likely to forget about their 
reading habits and lose the track of their progress. Lack of gamified features 
4 
 
and visualization of progress leads to the lack of engagement and discipline in 
reading. Li et al. (2024) found that the lack of visualizing their reading success 
in learners reduces their motivation in the long run. Nursi et al. (2025) 
discovered that the users do not stick to the habit of self-directed learning 
without structured progress tracking. Also, Meng et al. (2024) found that the 
absence of effective engagement features on online platforms leads to a 
decrease in participation and motivation among learners. 
 
 
To overcome these problems, this project suggests creating a gamified mobile 
app that can be used to monitor the progress in reading. The system combines 
digital cataloguing with gamification features like points, badges and levels to 
make the process of reading a rewarding experience. Progress charts and 
statistics allow the users to see their progress and thus make reading a fun and 
organized habit. This strategy is expected to assist users to develop regular 
reading habits, keep records of books systematically, and improve their general 
reading motivation. 
 
1.3 Project Objectives 
 
The objectives of this project are: 
I. To identify suitable gamification element to enhance users’ reading 
engagement. 
II. To develop a gamified mobile app that allows users to record and 
monitor their reading progress. 
III. To evaluate the functionality of the mobile application. 
 
1.4 Project’s Scope 
 
The system to be developed will be in the form of an android application to 
make it widely available and compatible with popular mobile devices. The app 
is designed to be used by students, teachers and casual readers who wants to 
build their reading discipline and keep records of personal reading activity 
5 
 
done in the day. Through cantering on mobile technology, the system aspires 
to increase convenience and flexibility for users so they can take their reading 
journey wherever or whenever. 
  
 
The app will have its own data, which includes books added by the users 
including manual entry of book or scan ISBN & barcode. This facilitates the 
creation of a customized digital reading collection that fills up with both 
present and past reads. The recorded data will be used for the purposes of 
monitoring progress, book classification, and user reading behaviour. This 
data is the backbone people will need for visualising their progress and 
keeping a clean list of what they read. 
 
 
As to the method, it integrates gaming, visualization, and recommendation 
technologies so as to stimulate and motivate users when reading. Gamification 
elements like points, levels and badges are employed to reinforce their regular 
reading activity and visual charts are introduced to display the reading status 
update so that they can effortlessly managing and reviewing his/her 
performance. The system has a simple content-based recommendation feature 
to suggest books based on the available books' metadata and user's reading 
history, which would help to improve the personalized reading experience for 
the user. The recommendation system takes into account data such as genre, 
author and books saved in the library of the reader to determine the user's 
reading preferences. The application fetches the relevant book suggestions 
from the external book sources, such as Google Books API, Open Library API, 
based on these preferences. This simplistic method works well in the prototype 
of a mobile application as it doesn't ask for a complex machine learning 
algorithm, TF-IDF, cosine similarity or a large amount of user data. In 
summary, by combining gamification, visual feedback of data and personal 
recommendations; the smart system nudges users to participate perpetually 
and to evolve using technology-enabled learning. 
 
6 
 
1.5 Significance 
 
This system is important because it enhances reading motivation by including 
gamified features which results in a feeling of accomplishment and rewards. 
Elements of gamification such as levels, points and badges aim to encourage 
user engagement and satisfaction by changing reading from a passive process 
into something interactive and fun. The system also reinforces users to read 
continuously and regularly, it provides visible progress as well as recognition 
for effort, thus supporting them in forming reading habits and maintaining 
reading motivation overtime. This approach to motivation facilitates the 
involvement of human's psychological part in learning through using success 
and improvement as a continuing factor for participation. 
 
 
Also, this project offers the feature of reading management in a systematic 
manner which is another great advantage. With this system, users can enjoy 
the digital-based platform, and they will be able to record their reading such as 
logging in, classifying data on what book or novel that is being read, tracking 
in time of study. With functionality such as inputting barcode or ISBN 
information, users can easily maintain a catalog of their personal library and 
its current reading status. It's this structure that minimizes any disorientation, 
and maximizes convenience, the latter a particularly welcome quality for those 
who are often juggling several books at once. An application that can visualize 
and update reading data in one integrated environment to provide a better user 
experience is possible, and it is very effective for managing time through 
reading. 
 
 
Lastly, the application encourages lifelong learning by imposing a tendency to 
self-improve and discipline with quantifiable reading goals. The system’s 
gamified feedback and data-visualisation capabilities ensure users comprehend 
their progress, encouraging them to set new reading goals. This ongoing 
process of setting and achieving goals encourages internal motivation and 
7 
 
helps us grow as people. Through its blend of education, technology and 
gamification, the app not only promotes reading behaviour but also supports a 
healthy learning culture worth to last outside scholarly environments. 
 
1.6 Conclusion 
 
This chapter has laid out the importance of reading motivation, and how 
gamification can leverage engagement through technology. It has analysed 
existing empirical research on gamified learning platforms which suggest the 
extent to which a gamified learning platform promotes user engagement and 
self-regulated learning. But the current systems do not include motivational 
design to help people self-regulate their reading. The proposed solution is an 
interactive, structured and entertaining gamified mobile application that will 
follow the user’s reading track, in that way would potentially solve this gap. 
The next chapter will present an extensive literature review related to this 
study and associated theoretical models used to inform the deployment of game 
elements and progress tracking in educational and personal learning settings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
CHAPTER 2 
 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
 
This chapter presents the theoretical requirements, and technical factors that drive 
ReadAlert mobile app development. Their intent is to present a general view of 
reading in the digital era, focusing on different categories of digital reading material 
and recommendation services that alleviate attention scarcity. The chapter discusses 
the concept of gamification, and we highlight why reward, progression, challenge 
methods are good for keeping users engaged. Reading and habit tracking apps are 
analysed, competing against each other's applications to be compared on their 
strengths and weaknesses. Finally, the elements of games and game features used for 
ReadAlert to increase reading comprehension and foster habit of reading are discussed 
in this chapter. Conceptual diagram of the application is illustrated in Figure 2.1. 
 
 
Figure 2.1 Concept Map For ReadAlert 
 
 
9 
 
2.1 Overview of Reading 
 
Reading is a complex and interactive activity in today’s educational 
environments, which includes not just traditional printed text but also occurs 
across varied digital modes of communication. In this regard, literacy tasks 
have traditionally been divided into expressive and receptive skills. Changes 
in the texts from printed books to digital interactive platforms of reading have 
had a profound impact on how students interact with text and acquire 
knowledge. Recent studies have emphasized the changing context of reading 
patterns, especially among younger populations for whom the mobile device 
has become a mainstay in both academic and leisurely reading practices (Liu 
et al., 2023). This transformation is leading to an increasing curiosity around 
both reading engagement, comprehension and the overall experience of 
reading across media. 
 
  
One important focus area is the contrast between printed and digital texts. 
There are of course countless conveniences to reading digitally, but the science 
does support that printed materials can lead to better comprehension and longer 
attention spans. For instance, Parsons et al. (2021) learners preferred the 
interactive elements of digital reading platforms, yet despite these preferences 
they continued to prefer printed texts for leisure reading because of tactility 
and ownership. It reinforces a complex and multi-faceted pattern of behaviour, 
in which digital can be attractive for its immediacy and game-like properties, 
but that print continues to play such essential roles in specific reading 
experiences. 
 
 
Furthermore, the motivations driving reading engagement are diverse and 
context dependent. Liu et al. (2023) discovered that there were four dominant 
motivational needs driving college students’ mobile reading behaviour, 
including information need, academic need, social need and emotional need. 
They found that even students with little time to read in daily life were using 
10 
 
mobile reading to meet certain informational and academic needs, indicating 
that mobile reading is not just entertainment but also an important supplement 
to learning. The study also pointed out that difficulties such as distractions and 
eye strain could detract from the reading process, which in turn emphasises the 
importance of well-designed digital reading environments for 
counterbalancing these obstacles. 
 
 
The use of gamification on reading apps is a rich potential field to explore in 
terms of motivation and engagement. With gameful elements, including points, 
badges, and leaderboards integrated into digital reading platforms it is possible 
to create a more interactive and rewarding experience of reading (Parsons et 
al., 2021) These gamified features are not only capable of motivating accuracy 
in learning practices but also facilitate the interest of digital natives who want 
instantaneous feedback and consider competitive as one part of their life 
learning. Learning what roles material format, user motivation, and 
technological supports play as reading is changing in the digital era will 
continue to be important in creating effective interventions and tools for 
reading. 
 
2.1.1 Type of Reading Material 
 
Texts are written in different types, to fulfil various communicative functions 
and have effects on the way readers interpret and understand. The rise of 
digital technology has transformed pre-existing categories of reading 
materials and fostered novel modes of engagement that are more interactive 
with a mass audience. These material types must be understood to design 
systems capable of accommodating different reading practices and values. 
Recent studies demonstrate how various printed, digital, educational, 
informational, literacy, visual and technical media influence understanding, 
motivation and engagement differently. 
 
 
11 
 
▪ Printed Material  
 
Printed material refers to physical texts such as books, newspapers, and 
magazines that offer a tactile reading experience. Studies have shown that even 
as people continue turn to digital increasingly, they still value reading in print 
for certain types of content, particularly leisure and deep reading. Parsons et 
al. (2021) found that students often prefer traditional printed books for leisure 
reading because of a sense of ownership and an ability to turn pages and 
underline text. And there's the added phenomenon that print seems to yield 
better understanding and retention, as readers can touch and turn pages rather 
than fight off the distractions speakers or other gadgets provide. Traditional 
reading habits, even among digital natives remain, particularly when the need 
for prolonged attachment to a narrative is desired. 
 
▪ Digital Material  
 
Digital material refer to an electronic document that can be accessed through 
using mobile device, tablet, and computer. According to Liu et al. (2023), 
Mobile reading used to be" a common behaviour that makes texts accessible to 
readers and readers’ private space in all time and everywhere “it has opened up 
the possibility for a fragmentary and customizable form of reading that could 
be carried out during breakeven minutes. Digital texts may involve use of 
audio, video, in addition to hyperlink in various combinations. 
 
▪ Educational Material  
 
Educational materials are specifically created to aid learning in a subject and 
the acquisition of knowledge using Learning Management Systems (LMS), 
mobile apps, among others. As Liu et al. (2023) argue, learning materials are 
intended to address the ‘academic needs’ of the users in their search for 
discipline knowledge, academic articles, and the boundaries of research. 
Learning materials in the mobile learning environment are specifically 
designed to aid students in the execution of learning tasks, learning in class, 
12 
 
and theses/examinations. As stated by Ahmed et al. (2025), learning materials 
are now hosted on cloud services that enable the lecturer to upload learning 
materials like PDF documents, videos, among others. 
 
▪ Informational Material  
 
Informational material is solely the retrieval of facts and news in a swift 
manner. Liu et al. (2023) stress that “information needs are one of the 
fundamental motivations for mobile device reading activities the readers want 
items such as news stories and stories about employment strategies and general 
facts as a means of staying informed.” The nature of this material is 
characterized by its utility and timeliness it is read with the intention of gaining 
awareness of what is happening in the world around us and for the purpose of 
expanding one's familiarity with the many facets of life. The motivation for 
informational material consumption could well be the demand for speedy and 
comprehensive access to facts. 
 
▪ Literacy Material 
 
Literacy materials are books written for the express purpose of building and 
strengthening reading, vocabulary, and comprehension skills. Such materials 
are critical for moving readers from one stage of literacy development to the 
next, Swiss-cheese-reader pre-readers who have some inkling that the mark on 
a page corresponds to speech sounds all the way up to sophisticated experts 
who can use and synthesize complex information. In schools and classrooms, 
literacy materials are often levelled storybooks or books that focus on specific 
skills such as print decoding and vocabulary to build a reading practice. 
 
▪ Visual Reading Material  
 
Visual reading materials, which are a combination of texts and images, are used 
to facilitate understanding for the reader(s), in particular the multimodal 
learners who benefit from the multimodal input. Chen et al. (2023), who 
13 
 
investigate the first, also investigate the engagement and flow experienced by 
learners as they interpret gamified interactive e-books featuring multimedia 
such as images and animations, to see if it facilitates the recognition and 
learning of characters for learners. These materials could serve as a scaffolding 
text for beginning language learners to guide them through the early learning 
stages, where the pictures serve as a point of reference between the abstract 
text and the tangible images of objects. When provided with such visual cues 
that attenuate the cognitive burden involved in message making from text 
alone, the benefits of reading are made even more apparent. 
 
▪ Technical Material  
 
Technical materials are topic-specific texts that are utilized in the process of 
teaching complicated materials. Frequently involving high degrees of mental 
work, and accurate interpretation. Such materials are used in the framework of 
a described by Ahmed et al. (2025). Students get involved in Object-Oriented 
Programming (OOP) course. information concerning encapsulation, 
inheritance and polymorphism. Unlike informational text, technical documents 
are generally incorporated into general informational text. gamified or cloud-
based solutions to assist students in mastering the challenging concepts. using 
organized modules and examinations. This form of reading material is 
important to vocational and STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and  
Mathematics) where the aim is to close the knowledge gaps on. 
 
 
In general, the rising heterogeneity of reading resources are indicators of the 
changing reading patterns due to the technological revolution. All formats have 
their advantages and difficulties which affect user motivation, understanding, 
and consistency in reading. Such differences are the reason to create systems 
such as gamified reading applications that will support a variety of reading 
formats and improve the user interaction with the application by the interactive 
design. 
 
14 
 
 
2.2 Overview of Gamification 
 
The concept of gamification has been broadly established within the current 
academic literature as the deliberate exercise of game design and game 
mechanics to contexts that do not involve games to increase the engagement, 
motivation, and participation of the users. Unlike game-based learning, 
through which new games are developed and implemented (specifically) to be 
used as educational tools, gamification means altering established learning 
activities with added elements to encourage a specific behavior and turn 
otherwise inert activities into interactive ones (adding points, badges, and 
more). This practice is often based on the Self-Determination Theory (SDT): it 
is assumed that to maintain intrinsic motivation, it is necessary to fulfill three 
basic psychological needs in particular competence, autonomy, and 
relatedness. As stressed by Ahmed et al. (2025), gamification can be viewed as 
a novel educational approach that does not only enhance productivity but also 
curbs the usual issues of digital learning setting, including student seclusion 
and absence of concentration. Gamification creates an environment where the 
end user feels pressure to engage in the learning process once it is converted to 
an environment of progress and accomplishment by standing from passive 
consumption to direct interaction. 
 
 
The success of gamification is very dependent on the use of game mechanics, 
including points, levels, feedback, and leaderboards, which serve to act as 
motivational levers to track the success and put progress in a visual form. 
Khaldi et al. (2023) distinguish such tools as points, badges, and leaderboards 
as the most widespread and most effective in the field of digital higher 
education to encourage student engagement. These mechanics work by giving 
direct feedback, which, according to Parsons et al. (2021), is essential in 
lessening cognitive load and inquiry in the complex activity, maintaining 
cognitive involvement. Moreover, the addition of such dynamic aspects as day-
to-day challenges and rankings encourages the values of social interactions and 
15 
 
purpose-setting which is proven to contribute considerably to the level of 
emotional involvement and motivation in reading. These elements, when 
properly drawn, contribute to the accomplishment of redirecting the attention 
of the user towards more intrinsic gratification instead of focusing on extrinsic 
rewards as this will allow them to look at reading as worth-while and fun 
activity. 
 
2.2.1 Type of Gamification 
 
Educational applications of gamification strategies can be popularly classified 
into the categories of the psychological motivators used to increase user 
interaction. According to Wang et al. (2024), there are many different methods 
in instruction in reading that fall into such categories as Reward-Based 
Gamification and Progression-Based Gamification, where points and badges 
and levels and progress bars are used respectively to receive immediate 
satisfaction and assessments of long-term progress; and Challenge-Based 
Gamification where tasks and quests are applied accordingly to gain mastery. 
Others are Social Gamification, where the competition with the help of 
leaderboards promotes engagement by encouraging peer comparison and 
Avatar Gamification when personalization and identity are in focus, so a user 
can create a digital personas akin to the example of the Clown Warrior that 
Chen et al. (2023) described when she creates such a character and puts more 
attention and emotion into the learning process. 
 
 
In the case of the ReadAlert application, three types have been chosen, namely: 
Reward-Based Gamification, Progression-Based Gamification and Challenge-
Based Gamification. This choice can be justified by the recent results of Khaldi 
et al. (2023), who must add that such achievement-orientated affordances as 
points and challenges, are the most popularly used and effective features in 
web-based learning platforms. The aim of the system, by balancing both 
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation with immediate rewards to certify effort, 
progression systems to trace growth, and challenges to encourage your activity 
16 
 
daily is to provide you with a balanced environment that can be easily achieved 
in purely competitive systems through social pressure. 
 
▪ Reward-Based Gamification  
 
Reward-Based Gamification. Providing concrete or symbolic reinforcements 
of desirable behaviour allows for gratified feedback from the system at the 
immediate moment. Wang et al. (2024) observed that most common forms of 
game-based rewards are points and badges, which effectively motivate learners 
by transforming ordinary learning tasks into more engaging activities. When 
considering mobile learning system, Ahmed et al. (2025) defined such rewards 
as an important part of a mechanism which allows instructor to keep track of 
students' actions and contributions to the system. As an illustration, individual 
users are rewarded with "coins" or "Experience Points (XP)" for specific 
interaction activities, such as login, logout, and completion of specific tasks. 
Such mechanism is most imperative to keep user interested in the system 
because it provides the user with instant useful feedback, which acts as a form 
of reward for the user achievement and, assuming equally, a motivation for 
users to keep on repeating desirable task such as reading. 
 
▪ Progression-Based Gamification 
 
Progress-based Gamification, on the other hand, concentrates the means of 
visualizing a user's progression, status and development throughout a given 
period. This variety also often makes use of stages and progress bars to offer 
players a transparent journey on their progression. According to Wang et al. 
(2024), as a common tool for primary and secondary education, progress bar 
is essential to enable students see what proportion of the task or even book they 
had left to complete by reducing the uncertainty from long-term goals. Ahmed 
et al. (2025) also note that the more points users get, users "level-up", and that 
it is an indicator of how consistent and good they are. This mechanism meets 
the psychological need for competence by showing to users an aggregated view 
17 
 
of their accomplishments which stimulates them to keep using the application 
and advance to higher levels of competence 
 
▪ Challenge-Based Gamification 
 
Challenge-Based Gamification: The act of creating tough challenges that the 
learner must overcome on a quest, mission or daily challenge. Khaldi et al. 
(2023) consider challenges as "deeper game elements" as they extend beyond 
superficial rewards to demand cognitive effort and problem solving. Wang et 
al. (2024) argue that challenge elements are commonly implemented in higher 
education to promote critical thinking and engagement too. In the ReadAlert 
system, this is daily goals (e.g., "Read 20 pages today") or comprehension 
quizzes. At the same time, it achieves a sense of accomplishment and discipline 
which is difficult for users to develop through their usual passive reading 
experience by making reading Introduces a series of tasks to accomplish rather 
than just an activity. 
 
2.2.2 Game Elements 
 
Game Elements are the basic building blocks of gamification and are the 
interactive mechanics that drive the user's behaviour, motivation and 
engagement in a non-game environment. Khaldi et al. (2023) identify these 
elements like points, badges, leaderboards and challenges as essential tools of 
visualizing progress and rewarding effort in digital learning environments. 
These components work to meet the psychological needs of the users for 
competence and achievement. For example, Ahmed et al. (2025) highlight that 
elements such as experience points (XP) and levels give immediate feedback 
to students on their contributions that forge abstract learning goals into tangible 
metrics. Wang et al. (2024) further plainly elucidates the idea that whereas 
certain elements such as leaderboards prove to be effective in promoting 
competition, others such as the progress bars and narrative contexts are 
important in guiding the learners in their educational journey. For the 
development of the ReadAlert application, specific elements have been chosen 
18 
 
to emphasize the formation of individual habits and intrinsic motivation, rather 
than to emphasize on plain competition. Therefore, the system will use Points, 
Challenges, Badges & Titles, Progress Bars and Streaks as its main 
motivational drivers. 
  
▪ Points  
 
Points are sometimes called Experience Points or XP or coins are the granular 
unit-based measurements of user efforts and engagement within a gamified 
system. Ahmed et al. (2025) describe points is a mechanism to record and 
accumulate student contributions, where points are awarded for some specific 
actions which can be logging into the system, learning materials or even daily 
tasks. This immediate quantitative feedback is important in sustaining user 
interest as the points act as a digital currency which validates successful 
performance, substituting real-life rewards with a sense of accomplishment 
that keeps users interested in continuing their interaction. In the context of 
ReadAlert, points give a sense of accumulation, which is continuous, seeing 
the direct result of the efforts made by reading in real-time. 
 
▪ Challenges  
 
Challenges, commonly in the form of quests or missions, serve as specific, 
goal-oriented actions that put a student into active efforts and thinking to 
accomplish them. Khaldi et al. (2023) categorize challenges as something 
"deeper game elements" that transcend surface level rewards to require the 
player to solve a problem and continue focusing on it. Wang et al. (2024) 
emphasizing that challenges are often used in educational formats to encourage 
critical thinking skills and it can be distinguished to meet specific goals (such 
as reading a certain number of pages, passing a comprehension quiz). Chen et 
al. (2023) further stress that the challenges should be balanced not too hard and 
not too easy to maintain a state of flow whereby the user remains competent 
yet challenged by the task at hand. By introducing reading as a set of attainable 
obstacles, impediments become productive objectives for intellectual mastery. 
19 
 
▪ Badges & Titles 
 
Badges and titles are visual credentials for the user's achievements, skills 
acquired or status within the system. Ahmed et al. (2025) explain that badges 
should be reserved for significant milestones such as mastering a particular 
topic or achieved a difficult quiz successfully leading to a high score effectively 
act as a type of digital trophy as a symbol of competence. For example, some 
achievements may earn one earn different badges such as 'Champion' or 
'Graduate' if he or she attains some performance standards, so some pride is 
placed on the user as capable learners. Chen et al. (2023) add that these 
symbolic rewards meet the user's requirement for recognition and social proof 
which will motivate the user to keep engaging with the content to receive more 
accolades and higher title 
 
▪ Progress Bar 
 
A progress bar is a type of interface element that is intended to give the user 
immediate and ongoing feedback as to how far she or he has progressed toward 
a specific goal. Parsons et al. (2021) cites how progress bars are important to 
help create less ambiguity to long-term tasks by letting the user immediately 
tell how much of a book, chapter, or level there is yet to do. This visualization 
of "distance to goal" is a highly effective motivator, according to Chen et al. 
(2023) In a study of apps, discovering that there is instant feedback in an app 
through visual indicators help maintain cognitive engagement and they 
encourage users to continue until the task is 100% complete. In ReadAlert, 
there will be progress bars that track both the reading of individual books and 
the user's journey to reading their daily or weekly reading targets. 
 
▪ Streaks  
 
Streaks are a behavioural mechanic that is based on the idea of consistency and 
habit formation applied frequently through fixed reward schedules. Parsons et 
al. (2021) Talk about the need to promote the daily return to the platform 
20 
 
through the provision of specific incentives for continuous return to the 
platform that helps to create a routine. Ahmed et al. (2025) in support of this, 
points out that reward system of awarding points for day-to-day actions, such 
as simply logging in to the system, encourages students to ensure they attend 
regularly and helps in preventing the attrition of learning habits. In the context 
of ReadAlert, streaks are used to create a visualization of this chain of daily 
activity, taking advantage of the user's desire to not break his or her run of 
success to develop long-term discipline and ensure that reading will be a daily 
practice. 
 
2.3 Overview of Recommendation System 
 
The introduction of the Recommendation Systems (RS) can be seen as a 
possible solution to the issue of information overload where the abundance of 
digital content at one's disposal makes it hard to find something that is relevant 
in an efficient way. According to Rosidah & Dellia (2024), a recommendation 
system is the approach that offers suggestions to users with the help of available 
data and choice criteria. In the case of digital libraries and reading applications, 
they have become especially crucial; otherwise, the abundance of books can 
repress students, and they will find it hard to use the tools independently and 
select the reading material that can match their interests. Recommendation 
systems will simplify the process of discovery by narrowing down on large 
volumes of data to offer the most pertinent items and provide an overall 
improved experience to the user. 
 
  
These systems work in a functional way, where they are used in analysing all 
the information available on the profile of user, history, and past activities to 
determine future preferences. The main objective of an effective 
recommendation system is to deliver simpler personalized responses and 
suggestions so that the users will make informed choices on the material they 
read. The use of this kind of system in the educational context is critical to 
enhancing the level of participation among students; by enabling them to 
21 
 
access books that suit their personal levels of needs and attraction, the system 
could contribute immensely towards raising the level of interest in reading and 
use of library facilities. Recommendation systems, therefore, are an interface 
between the vast digital content and the individual, particular user 
requirements. 
 
2.3.1 Machine Learning  
 
Machine Learning (ML) is a subfield of artificial intelligence, whereby one 
trains algorithms on data to learn patterns to make predictions or choices, 
without defining the algorithm to perform certain functions. There are four 
broad types of ML algorithms, namely, supervised learning, unsupervised 
learning, reinforcement learning, and deep learning. Supervised learning works 
on a labelled data set whereby the algorithm is trained to covary the inputs to 
known available output, where it is applicable to such tasks as classification 
and regression (Siafis et al., 2024). Reinforcement learning is concerned with 
the training of agents to make series of decisions, where the outcomes desired 
are rewarded and undesired behaviour punished and is frequently applied in 
dynamic environments. Deep learning is based on multi-layered neural 
networks that are used to model complex trends in large data sets, and it is more 
effective in tasks such as image and speech recognition.  
 
 
Within the framework of this project, the concept of unsupervised learning is 
selected as the main one. In contrast to supervised learning, unsupervised 
learning works with unlabelled data, which is the data that is not marked with 
any specific hidden structure, pattern, or relationship (the algorithm must 
detect this information on its own) (Siafis et al., 2024). This practice is 
especially beneficial to a reading program in which user preferences are not 
necessarily labelled or in which the system must find or identify organic 
collections of books and readers without a priori knowledge. The system can 
make personalized recommendations by relying on unsupervised learning 
which enables it to automatically group similar books or users so that it builds 
22 
 
its own background based on the inherent properties of the data instead of the 
labels integrated into it. 
 
▪ Unsupervised Learning 
 
Unsupervised learning consists of teaching methods aimed at analysis and 
interpretation of unlabelled data, such as association, clustering, 
dimensionality reduction, and recommendation methods. The association rules 
will be used to find interesting associations among the variables in large 
databases like finding out which books are often read together. Clustering 
refers to grouping together a collection of objects such that objects within a 
given group (or cluster) are more closely related than to objects in other groups; 
it can be used to contain the number of random variables that one is interested 
in, simplifying the data without sacrificing the important information. The 
approach of dimensionality reduction, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), 
is applied to consider a smaller number of random variables than the original 
data, reducing the complexity of the data and still having certain important 
information.  
 
 
The recommendation method that will be selected to use in the case of the 
ReadAlert system is the unsupervised learning method. This is a method that 
is specifically created to forecast the user preference to an item that the 
individual has not yet selected depending on the trends of the available data. 
Through the recommendation methods in the unsupervised learning model, the 
system will be able to analyse the interaction of the user like the books read, 
time spent reading and types of books searched and propose new ones that may 
resonate with the interests of the user. This approach enables a customized user 
experience as it constantly adapts to the changing reading patterns of the user 
and, therefore, creates a long-term engagement and habit formation. 
 
 
 
23 
 
▪ Recommendation Technique 
 
Recommendations techniques are also important elements of the current 
information filtering systems which are mainly organized into three major 
categories: Hybrid Recommendation, Collaborative Filtering, and Content-
Based Filtering. Collaborative Filtering is built on the idea that a user who 
previously agreed will be able to agree in the future; it suggests items to the 
user, basing on the taste of similar users (Rosidah & Dellia, 2024). Hybrid 
Recommendation systems are a set of hybrid frameworks of multiple methods 
in general, which are often collaborative as well as content-based filtering to 
address the drawbacks of single methods, such as the cold start problem when 
new users or things do not have enough data (Siafis et al., 2024). 
 
 
 In this project, the Content-Based Filtering is chosen as the most appropriate 
recommendation technique. The process suggests items to a user, which has 
been identified as similar to their profile aspects, which consist of past 
preferences and interactions (Rosidah & Dellia, 2024)) Content-Based 
Filtering can especially be utilized in a reading app since in this type of 
application, the system can suggest books that possess certain similarities to 
the ones the user has enjoyed in the past (gene, author, and topics). This method 
guarantees that the recommendations are very applicable with regards to the 
individual taste regardless of the data of other users hence is strong even in 
cases where there are a few users or it has niche reading interests. 
 
▪ Content-Based Filtering 
 
One of the recommendation methods that uses the features of items and also 
users to create recommendations is Content Based Filtering. A book profile can 
be created using information like title, author, summary, category, or genre in 
a library or reading application. Meanwhile, the system can build up a user 
profile of all books that the user has read, saved, or liked. The importance of 
words in documents can be calculated using algorithms like Term Frequency-
24 
 
Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) and similarity between the user profile 
and available books is calculated using Cosine Similarity in some content-
based recommendation system (Rosidah & Dellia, 2024). But in this project, 
ReadAlert implements a simpler approach, called Content Based Filtering, 
based on metadata. The system identifies reading preferences by determining 
the similarity of the reading text to a user's saved reading history, genre, 
category, author etc of the available book metadata rather than calculating the 
similarity of text using TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity. From the following book 
preferences, it fetches appropriate book suggestions from external book 
sources like Google Books API and Open Library API. This is a good choice 
for the prototype since there are very few machine learning algorithms and 
large user datasets needed for this approach. 
 
2.4 Existing Applications 
 
In this section, various applications that are already used, having similar 
features like in this project are discussed and compared. This comparison is 
intended to compare their background, functionality, scope, user experience, 
and strategies to gamification to draw conclusions on their strengths, 
limitations, and the points where the suggested system can develop better. 
Applications that are picked to be compared are Bookmory, PagePots, and 
Habitica, which have some elements of reading related tracking or game-based 
learning. These applications were selected due to their similarities of the 
features of reading engagement, progress monitoring, whether the user is 
motivated or not, and the interactive features. 
 
2.4.1 Bookmory 
 
Bookmory is a reading tracker application, which is supposed to assist the user 
in documenting and categorizing reading. It enables users to store the 
information about the books they read, monitor their reading, and come up with 
reading statistics. Figure 2.2 indicate that the user interface is simple, and it is 
centered on simplicity to enable a distractive-free experience. 
25 
 
  
Figure 2.2 Bookmory Interfaces 
 
The primary audience of the Bookmory consists of teenagers and adults who 
are enthusiasts of reading and wish to keep track of their habits. It has various 
handy tools, like reading timers, visual progress measures, reading goals per 
day, and some specific to individual measures related to reading pace and time 
spent reading. Being great as data logging, Bookmory is also largely dependent 
on the inherent discipline of the user. It does not have systematized 
gamification features including challenges or competitive positions. According 
to Khaldi et al. (2023), such aspects as badges and leaderboards can be rather 
common to trigger an active engagement and avoid the turnover of users, which 
means that Bookmory might not be able to retain those who are not already 
motivated to read. In addition, it does not make use of Content-Based Filtering 
in facilitating smart suggestions, as is the case with the proposed system. 
  
2.4.2 PagePots 
  
PagePots is a mobile reading tracker app that allows individuals to make their 
goals and track their habits in the form of visuals. Figure 2.3 depict the interface 
presentation of the bookshelves and reading charts making special focus on 
aesthetics, and usability. 
26 
 
  
Figure 2.3 PagePots Interfaces 
  
The application mostly targets young adults and the general readers who desire 
an entertaining and innovative means of keeping track of their reading 
endeavours. PagePots incorporates the light gamification of themes with the 
challenges of reading, rewarding achievements, and pleasant progress 
animations. It is also geared towards encouraging their users to read repeatedly 
by giving them monthly challenges and individual progress charts. PagePots 
combines thematic challenges and visual development in light gamification. 
This is in line with Parsons et al. (2021) observation that visual progress bars 
have the capacity to mitigate the ambiguity of time-consuming activities. 
PagePots, however, does not include learning modules and courses. It is also 
concerned with the amount of reading but not the quality of understanding and 
fails to take advantage of the abilities of gamification to engage the cognitive 
experience as indicated by Wang et al. (2024). 
 
2.4.3 Habitica 
 
Habitica is a productivity program that employs complete gamification as a 
form of motivation. It turns the everyday chores into game missions wherein 
users gain Experience Points (XP) and gold. Figure 2.4 display the interface is 
a Role-Playing Game (RPG) that has avatars and guild.
27 
 
 
 
Figure 2.4 Habitica Interfaces 
     
Habitica is not limited to any age, which is how it manages to appeal to 
teenagers as well as adults, and is popular among self-improvement and the 
creation of certain habits. It has an extremely developed gamification, with 
challenges, levelling systems, streaks, achievements, and social co-operation 
in the form of group quests. Habitica is doing quite well in the term of the 
Progression-Based Gamification, whereby earning XP can fulfil the 
competence requirement of the user. Nonetheless, it is a habit tracker in the 
general sense but is not reading specific. It does not have attribute such as 
literacy material or technical reading, so the user must create reading activities 
manually without the advantage of automatic tracking and customized book 
recommendations. 
 
2.4.4 Comparison of Existing Applications 
  
Table 2.1 contains a comparative analysis of the chosen applications in terms 
of their target audience, learning orientation, content structure, gamification 
element and overall functionality. The given comparison can be used to 
demonstrate the gap that the given system is supposed to address especially 
when it comes to integrating reading progress tracking, a recommendation 
system, and the elements of gamification, designed in a single platform. 
28 
 
Table 2. 1 Comparison of Existing Applications And ReadAlert 
 
Feature Bookmory PagePots Habitica ReadAlert 
Target Audience Teens and 
adults who 
actively 
engage in 
reading 
Young adults 
and general 
readers 
Teenagers to 
adults 
Teenagers to adults 
Main Focus Reading 
habit 
tracking 
Reading 
goals & 
motivation 
Habit-
building via 
gamification 
Reading engagement 
via gamification & 
intelligent 
recommendations 
Content 
Structure 
Simple logs 
& notes 
Themed 
reading 
trackers 
User-created 
tasks 
 
Structured reading 
categories & 
personalized 
suggestions 
Learning 
Method 
Self-
monitoring 
Visual 
progress & 
challenges 
RPG-style 
progression 
Data-driven 
recommendation & 
gamified 
engagement 
Gamification 
Type 
None Challenge, 
Reward 
based 
Gamification 
 
Avatar, 
Reward 
, Challenge, 
Progression 
Gamification 
Reward, Challenge, 
Progression 
Gamification 
Gamification 
Elements 
Streaks only Mini-
challenges, 
rewards 
XP, quests, 
badges, 
guilds 
Points, badges, 
challenges, streaks, 
progress bars 
Recommendation 
System 
None None None Content-Based 
Filtering 
Strengths Excellent 
data 
visualization 
and reading 
speed 
analysis. 
Fun visuals 
& challenges 
Strongest 
gamification 
Balanced tracking, 
learning, and 
gamification 
 
Altogether, the analysis reveals that Bookmory and PagePots concentrate on 
the tracking of reading activities and visual motivation, whereas Habitica is 
more successful at the gamification of forming a habit since none of them 
allows comprehending the tracking of reading activities, user-focused 
recommendations, and systematic gamification components under one roof. 
The proposed system is supposed to combine all these advantages as each 
provides an organized reading experience supported with smart 
recommendations and effective strategies of gamification, making it completer 
and more interesting than available alternatives. 
 
 
29 
 
2.5 Justification on Game Elements 
 
The choice of game mechanisms used in the ReadAlert app namely, Points, 
Challenges, Badges, Progress Bars, Streaks, is theoretically based on Self-
Determination Theory (SDT) according to which the learner engagement will 
be at maximum in case psychological needs are satisfied such as competence, 
autonomy, and relatedness needs. According to Chen et al. (2023) gamification 
is required to go more than just surface-level entertainment to meet these needs; 
one example of this is awarding Points (or XP) and Badges which meets the 
need of competence as the user can get concrete proof of mastery and skill 
acquisition. Although contexts such as Habitica have been developed and have 
been proven to be effective in using these elements in general habit building, it 
lacked the context needed to instil academic reading. Thus, by integrating these 
types of rewards within reading-specific context, the positive reinforcement 
that students urgently need to remain motivated when completing complicated 
reading tasks are obtained, as it is noted by Ahmed et al. (2025) as essential in 
narrowing knowledge gaps in technical disciplines. Moreover, the Progress 
Bars and Streaks usage can be explained by the necessity of the constant 
feedback and the development of the habits. According to Parsons et al. (2021), 
visual visualizations such as progress bars lower the cognitive load and 
uncertainty related to long-term tasks so that users can learn in real time about 
how far they have progressed. It is a merit that is noticed with PagePots, which 
employs the visual trackers attentively, but the suggested system will take this 
further by associating visual progress with Streaks. Ahmed et al. (2025) further 
state that daily activity consistency (streaks) points can be used to ensure the 
continuity of a learning habit by encouraging the user to visit the platform 
every day to keep their streak going. It is a combination that is needed in 
Bookmory, which has impressive statistical tracking, but does not have the 
behavioural engagement of streak-based gamification to encourage people to 
visit each day. 
 
 
30 
 
To turn the passive reading into active and goal-oriented reading, the 
Challenges implementation is necessary. Khaldi et al. (2023) define challenges 
as deeper elements of the game which are the ones that demand cognitive effort 
and problem-solving, unlike other simple reward mechanisms. PagePots does 
have themed events, but they tend to be aesthetic (based) instead of cognitive 
ones, whereas challenges in ReadAlpha are supposed to be adaptive and 
reading comprehension-specific, similar to the results of Wang et al. (2024) 
indicating that task-based challenges in learning institutions, in turn, have a 
significant benefit on critical thinking and engagement. The system can prompt 
students to read more well-rounded diet of academic materials that they would 
not read under other conditions by presenting reading requirements in the form 
of interactive missions (e.g. in form of a mission to read 20 pages of non-
fiction). 
 
 
Lastly, the whole-system approach to all these factors is to ensure that an 
equilibrium ecosystem that facilitates both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation is 
formed. Whereas Habitica is more effective at extrinsic motivation with the use 
of the RPG mechanics, and Bookmory is more effective at intrinsic motivation 
with the use of data logging, both applications do not cover the needs of the 
student readers who need both structure and encouragement as the hybrid ones. 
According to Chen et al. (2023), a properly developed gamified system should 
balance between the optimal challenges and positive feedback to ensure a flow 
of state, which will not be bored or anxious. Choosing this set of elements 
Points to provide feedback, Badges to say milestones, Streaks to be consistent 
and Challenges to be engaged, the proposed system can overcome the 
drawbacks of solutions presented on the market, being a complete tool, 
specifically created to make the university students more enduring and 
understanding in terms of reading. 
 
 
 
31 
 
2.6 Conclusion 
 
It is in this chapter that the theoretical and technical basis of the required 
development of the ReadAlert application has been reviewed in detail. The 
research of reading materials revealed the strong movement in the direction of 
digital and mobile platforms and the necessity to focus on the tools that can 
provide both the possibility to get access to the educational and informational 
materials as well as the problems of the keeping of attention and understanding 
in the digital world environment. To reduce the problem of information 
overload, the review has reviewed several recommendation strategies that can 
be applied to overcome the problem, which has led to the conclusion that the 
Content-Based Filtering strategy is the most appropriate strategy. The Content-
Based Filtering will present the suggestions of books based solely on the 
favourites of the user regarding the genre and authors. This approach allows 
users to be given personalized book suggestions, using the techniques of 
unsupervised machine learning and given the reading history and the interests 
of the user to increase the discovery process. Furthermore, the analysis of 
gamification has shown that it is highly necessary to make reading the habit of 
the goal orientation and not the passive activity anymore. Using the Self-
Determination Theory, the integration of reward based, progression based and 
challenge-based types of gamifications was realized to fulfil the psychological 
need of competence and autonomy among the users. The choice of certain 
game features Points, Challenges, Badges, Progress Bars, and Streaks was 
based on their effectiveness related to offering immediate feedback, visualising 
long-term growth, as well as promoting behavioural consistency. 
 
 
Lastly, the comparative analysis of the applications available such as 
Bookmory, PagePots, and Habitica revealed a gap that existed in the present 
market. Although these apps seem to be either a good habit-tracking 
application, visually appealing, or overall gamifying tasks, none provide a 
comprehensive option that would track academic reading and provide 
intelligent suggestions and goal-oriented gamification. This gap is the reason 
32 
 
the suggested ReadAlert system is intended to combine these differences in 
features into one unified system. In so doing it will offer a full-scale device to 
not only monitor reading advancement but also actively develop in students a 
sustainable and worthwhile reading culture. The design decisions and 
theoretical frameworks that are determined in this chapter are the roadmap in 
the system methodology and development phases in question in the following 
chapters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
 
METHODOLOGY 
 
 
The approach followed in designing the Gamified Mobile Application to Track 
Reading Progress is discussed in this chapter. It gives a comprehensive description 
of the way the system was planned, designed and developed during the project. The 
framework of the methodology employed to carry out the study is addressed to show 
how the systematic approach was followed in completing the project. The project 
methodology is discussed in Section 3.1 and is based on Mobile Application 
Development Life Cycle (MADLC) which has five major stages to the process 
including identification, design, development, prototyping, and testing. Section 3.2 
explains the system architecture of the suggested mobile application, whereas Section 
3.3 presents the hardware and software requirements utilized in the process of the 
development. 
 
3.1 Project Methodology 
 
The methodology to be applied in this project to achieve project development 
will be the Mobile Application Development Life Cycle (MADLC). MADLC 
offers the systematic and orderly approach, which can be applied to the 
projects that focus on the mobile applications and especially those that focus 
on the user interaction, interface design and usability testing. The 
characteristics of mobile applications such as use of multiple screens, active 
participation of the user, and an iterative process of improvement can make 
MADLC the right choice of this study. MADLC enables the development 
phases to be clearly spelled out and implemented in a systematic way. 
Samrgandi (2021), notes that the correct planning of user interface design and 
evaluation during the development process has a significant contribution to 
enhancing the usability and user satisfaction in mobile applications. 
Furthermore, the continuous assessment throughout development can be used 
to highlight the possible usability problems early and assist in the further 
34 
 
enhancement of the system (E. R. Oliveira et al., 2022). Figure 3.1 shows 
MADLC phases. 
 
   
Figure 3. 1 Mobile Application Development Life Cycle (MADLC) Phases 
 
The MADLC has seven phases in its entirety; these include identification, 
design, development, prototyping, testing, deployment and maintenance. And 
yet, as this project is aimed at the creation and testing of a working prototype, 
as opposed to a commercial product, the number of implemented phases is 
only five (5). These phases are deployment and maintenance, and they are not 
part of this research. This formalized approach is what allows making the 
process of development systematic and focused on the project goals, as well 
as facilitates usability, functionality, and user interaction via the iterative 
design and test (Sarah Salim et al., 2022). 
 
 
35 
 
3.1.1 Phase 1: Identification 
 
The first stage in the MADLC is the identification stage whereby, the project 
ideas and requirements are collected to be analysed. This stage is concerned 
with determining a problem statement, objectives, scope, and importance of 
the project to perfectly establish the system that should be developed. The 
identification phase can be imperative because it provides the basis of the 
successful process of mobile application development clarifying the direction 
and aim of the project. Some activities were implemented in this stage. These 
tasks involve finding out the problems, which are associated with keeping 
reading motivation and monitoring reading progress, outlining the project 
objectives, determining the scope of the project, and defining the importance 
of the suggested system. Moreover, research was done on the current 
applications in reading related mobile applications to determine their 
functionality and what they were lacking such as engagement and progress 
tracking. This review assists in revealing gaps that exist in existing 
applications and use the same as insights in improving the proposed system. 
Moreover, during this stage, it will be possible to determine appropriate 
techniques and methodologies that will be applied to the project development. 
MADLC was chosen because it is applicable to mobile applications which 
involve high interactivity of the user, interface design, and usability testing. 
During the development process, early detection of system requirements and 
methodologies can help enhance the usability and system effectiveness 
(Samrgandi, 2021). The summary of activities performed at the identified 
stage is given in Table 3.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
 
Table 3. 1 Identification Phase 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.2 Phase 2: Design 
 
The design is the second stage of MADLC. This step is aimed at modifying 
the identified needs of the previous step into a system design. Designing 
phase is an important process in the development of a mobile application 
because it will dictate the interaction of the users with the system and how 
the information can be displayed in application. This is the stage in which the 
system architecture and flow will be designed to give a clear picture of how 
the various component within a system will interact with one another. System 
architecture diagrams and application flowcharts are diagrams that are 
developed to represent the workflow and structure of the proposed mobile 
application. These diagrams can assist in making sure that the system design 
makes sense, is well structured and based on the project goals. Besides, the 
user interface (UI) design is created to make it usable so that navigation can 
be easy. Interfaces design is concerned with the uniformity of layouts, clarity, 
and simplicity to produce better user experience. Samrgandi (2021) mentions 
that early user interface design and testing are major factors in enhancing the 
usability of the application in the mobile system and guarantee user 
Phase         Activities Technique/Software Deliverable 
Initiation • Review existing 
reading and 
habit-tracking 
applications. 
• Study 
gamification 
elements 
suitable for 
reading 
engagement. 
• Compare 
existing 
applications 
such as 
Bookmory, 
PagePots, and 
Habitica. 
• Select suitable 
gamification 
elements for 
ReadAlert. 
• Online 
Database 
• Existing 
App 
 
• List of 
selected 
gamification 
elements. 
 
• Justification 
of 
gamification 
elements. 
 
• Comparison 
of existing 
applications. 
 
• Initial 
feature 
requirements 
for 
ReadAlert. 
37 
 
satisfaction. Thus, special care is taken regarding design screens which are 
user-friendly and intuitive. The stage gives an overarching design plan of the 
mobile application, which is used as a basis in the next phase of development. 
The summary of activities developed during the design stage will be 
contained in Table 3.2. 
Table 3. 2 Design Phase 
Phases Activities Technique/Software Deliverable 
Design • Design and 
draw system 
architecture 
• Design 
application 
flowchart 
 
• Draw.io 
 
• System 
architecture 
• Flowchart 
 
• Design user 
interface layout 
• Stitch 
 
• Storyboard 
 
▪ Storyboard Design for User Interfaces (UI) 
 
Figure 3.2 will demonstrate the wireframe storyboard in Stich design of the 
ReadAlert mobile application. This storyboard is a visual road map or blueprint 
that will emerge the general framework of the interface and the navigation path 
that the user must follow. The storyboard using the tracking of user interactions 
between the welcome page and authentication page and the home page and the 
core functional pages, including book catalog management, reading progress 
tracking, recommendations, and statistics, makes the interface logic clear, 
consistent, and easy to use. The design also encourages effective navigation 
and easy execution of tasks where the objective of the application of following 
progress in reading, as well as encouraging user motivation through the system 
of gamification, is acceptable and congruent with the objective of the user 
interface. 
 
38 
 
  
Figure 3. 2 Wireframe Storyboard Design for User Interface (UI) 
 
The storyboard that was created in the format of the wireframe was created to 
demonstrate the general flow and the structure of interaction of the user 
interface in the ReadAlert application in terms of mobile application. It gives 
us a pictorial map on how the users move within the system, starting with the 
Welcome Page, thereafter, the page of Login and Registration, then the page 
of the Home Page when the user gets success in a authentication. With this 
storyboard the flow of navigation is easy to follow and user-friendly, such that 
when one wishes to use the application, they end up knowing the structure of 
the application even prior to the real development. 
 
 
 
39 
 
On the Home Page, the user is allowed to use the fundamental functions of the 
application which includes Book Catalog Page, Reading Progress Page, Profile 
Page, Recommendation Page, settings page and statistics page. The Book 
Catalog Page gives a user a chance to organize their own reading library, and 
the Reading Progress Page gives the user an opportunity to upgrade and track 
their reading progress. The Profile Page informs the users of their achievements 
and gamification features, including badges, reading streaks, and levels, to 
provide motivation. The Recommendation Page will recommend the book 
depending on the user preferences as well as reading history, whereas the 
Statistics Page shows the reading progress in the form of simple charts and 
summaries. In general, wireframe storyboard is a guideline of user interface 
design as it helps in determining screen layouts, paths, and functional 
dependencies among modules in the user interface. It assists in making the 
design as consistent as possible, makes the interface more practical, and aligns 
the interface structure with the goals set by the ReadAlert application which is 
aimed at monitoring the reading progress and encouraging the users with the 
help of gamification. 
 
3.1.3 Phase 3: Development 
 
The third stage of MADLC is the development stage. This stage is the one 
that involves the conversion of the approved design specifications into a 
workable mobile application. The active coding was performed in this stage 
to introduce the main characteristics of the system and make sure that the 
functioning of the application takes place in accordance with the outlined 
requirements. The most important events of this stage are the application 
functionality creation, the database integration, and the gamification logic 
implementation. The design aspect underlines precision, stability of the 
system, and congruence of the interface-designed interface and the features 
applied. It is necessary to implement this phase properly so that the system 
can be functioning and easy to use. This project was developed based on 
Flutter as the development environment. Firebase was done to control the data 
storage, user-related information and synchronization of the application data. 
40 
 
Samrgandi (2021) notes that the most effective way to maintain usability and 
guarantee system reliability during the development process is the adequate 
implementation of the mobile application elements. The overview of 
activities done at the development stage is shown in Table 3.3. 
 
Table 3. 3 Development Phase 
Phases Activities Technique/Software Deliverable 
Development • Develop 
application 
functionalities 
• Implement 
user interface 
components 
 
• Flutter 
• Figma 
• Functional 
mobile 
application 
prototype 
• Implemented 
user 
interface 
• Integrate 
database and 
system logic 
 
• Firebase 
 
 
3.1.4 Phase 4: Prototyping 
 
The fourth step of the MADLC is the prototyping step that entails creating a 
prototyping of the mobile application. This prototype is a rough functioning 
prototype that illustrates the main features and system flow of the program 
prior to its actual implementation. This stage is aimed at the evaluation of the 
design, functionality system. Flutter was used to build the prototype in this 
project in accordance with the accepted system design and interface layouts. 
The prototype consists of such major features as progress tracking in reading, 
book management, and simple gamification. After its design, the prototype 
was examined to determine the general functionality and interface design. 
The system was refined and improved based on the feedback that was given 
after assessing the prototype. Another key issue in the prototyping stage is 
iterative refinement since this enables the developers to determine areas of 
functionality problems and enhance them before moving on to testing stage. 
It has been found that the iterative prototype evaluation allows the system 
quality by encompassing the feedback at the early stage of the development 
process (E. R. Oliveira et al., 2022). Besides that, early testing helps in 
enhancing minimizing possible crises in the later stages of the development 
41 
 
(Sarah Salim et al., 2022). This cyclic process is what will ensure the 
prototype follows the project requirements. Table 3.4 provides the overview 
of the work to be done in the prototyping stage. 
 
     Table 3. 4 Prototyping Phase 
  
3.1.5 Phase 5: Testing 
 
Testing stage is the 5th step in MADLC. At this stage the ReadAlert mobile 
application is tested to see that all functions implemented work as per the 
requirements of the project. The primary goal of this stage is to test how the 
application works on whether it gives the desired output when a user operates 
it with each functionality. The functional testing in this project is done with 
the black-box testing methodology. This means that they are testing each 
function according to its input and output but not the actual structure of source 
code of the program. The testing process includes all major features such as 
user registration, login, book search, ISBN or barcode search, adding books 
to library, updating reading progress, XP reward calculation, level and rank 
display, streak display, achievement display, reading statistics, reports and 
management of profile. Test cases are prepared for each feature, with the 
results expected from the feature compared to what the application generates. 
In case of any mistake or unexpected results are discovered, the mistake is 
fixed and the feature is then retested to check for proper functionality. The 
application will be repeatedly tested to increase the reliability of the 
application and to ensure that the final prototype is appropriate for 
Phase Activities Techniques / 
Software 
Deliverables 
Prototyping • Develop a 
working 
prototype of the 
mobile 
application 
• Evaluate 
prototype 
functionality and 
interface 
• Collect feedback 
and refine 
prototype 
accordingly 
• Flutter • Functional 
application 
prototype 
• Evaluation 
feedback 
42 
 
ReadAlert's primary functions to be demonstrated. The testing phase of this 
project is shown in Table 3.5. 
Table 3. 5 Testing Phase 
  
3.2 Summary of Project Methodology 
 
The systematic realization of each step of the MADLC was in fulfilment of 
all the aims that were set on the Gamified Mobile Application to Track 
Reading Progress. The process of development was systematic, repetitious 
and purpose oriented, which the methodology ensured. The identification 
phase was aimed at identifying the problem statement, the objective of the 
project, scope, and importance of the study. The research area and research 
field were investigated in this step, some of the available reading and tracking 
applications were studied to determine what they offer as advantages, and 
what they cannot do to enhance the advantages and offer improvements. This 
stage has further helped to meet the first goal, which is to find the appropriate 
requirements and features to build a gamified reading progress tracking 
application. 
 
 
The latter aim was covered at the design and development stages. At the 
design stage, the required diagrams were created including the methodology 
diagram, system architecture, and application flowchart. The user interface 
was also meant to be clear, user friendly and the user interface should be 
involved. The stage of development included implementation of the projected 
features by means of coding and reading progress tracking, elements of 
gamification, and database integration. This step converted the design 
specification into a working mobile application prototype. The next stage is 
the prototyping stage that implied producing a work version of the application 
Phase Activities Techniques / Software Deliverables 
Testing • Test application 
functionality and 
performance 
 
• Developer testing 
 
• Final 
applicati
on 
• Develop
er testing 
results 
 
43 
 
to comprise the main functions. Experts tested the prototype to determine its 
usability, functionality and general design. The evaluation provided 
feedback, which was then used to make the application refined and improved. 
The testing stage was finally performed to fulfil the third objective, that is to 
test the application in terms of functionality. A functional testing was 
undertaken to ascertain that the system is user friendly and that it is within 
requirements. The general indication of the project methodology is indicated 
in Table 3. 6. 
 
Table 3. 6 Summary of Project Methodology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective Phases Activities Deliverables 
To identify 
suitable 
gamification 
element to 
enhance 
users’ 
reading 
engagement. 
Identification • Review 
existing 
reading and 
habit-tracking 
applications. 
• Study 
gamification 
elements 
suitable for 
reading 
engagement. 
• Compare 
existing 
applications 
such as 
Bookmory, 
PagePots, and 
Habitica. 
• Select suitable 
gamification 
elements for 
ReadAlert. 
• List of selected 
gamification 
elements. 
 
• Justification of 
gamification 
elements. 
 
• Comparison of 
existing 
applications. 
 
• Initial feature 
requirements for 
ReadAlert. 
44 
 
     Table 3.6 (cont.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
3.3 System Architecture 
 
This section provides an overall system architecture of Gamified Mobile 
Application of Tracking Reading Progress. The system architecture is to help 
clearly demonstrate the interaction of the significant parts of the mobile 
application with each other and assist in the progress tracking reading, 
gamification and customized advice. The figure 3.3 below shows the 
architecture of the system of the proposed mobile application. 
Objective Phases Activities Deliverables 
To develop a 
gamified 
mobile app 
that allows 
users to 
record and 
monitor their 
reading 
progress. 
Design • Design and 
draw system 
architecture 
• Design 
application 
flowchart 
• Design user 
interface 
layout 
• System 
architecture 
• Flowchart 
• Storyboard 
Development • Develop 
application 
functionalities 
• Implement 
user interface 
components 
• Integrate 
database and 
system logic 
• Functional 
mobile 
application 
prototype 
• Implemented 
user interface 
Prototyping • Develop a 
working 
prototype of 
the mobile 
application 
• Evaluate 
prototype 
functionality 
and 
interface 
• Collect 
feedback 
and refine 
prototype 
accordingly 
• Functional 
application 
prototype 
• Evaluation 
feedback 
To evaluate 
the 
functionality 
of the 
mobile 
application. 
Testing • Test 
application 
functionality 
and 
performance 
 
• Final 
application 
• Developer 
testing results 
 
45 
 
 
  
  Figure 3. 3 System Architecture 
 
Initially the system starts when the user is directly involved with the mobile 
app by using an Android-based smart phone as illustrated in Figure 3.3. The 
mobile application will serve as the primary communication channel between 
the user and the system, and it will provide a variety of features that will 
enable users to perform their reading activities and track their progress, search 
for books, and engage with the gamification components. The presentation 
layer is responsible for handling user interaction and presenting the mobile 
user interface, ensuring smooth navigation and a user-friendly experience. 
The system core is made up of several functional modules which carry out 
the core processes of the application. The Reading Management Module 
controls reading functions like book catalogue management, monitoring 
reading progress, reading history and visualization of it. This module allows 
users to manually add books to their profile, search by book title or author, 
scan the ISBN/Barcode, update your reading progress, see how many pages 
you have read and see a summary of your reading activity. This module helps 
to organise, access and understand data from text. The Gamification Module 
aims to boost the motivation and engagement of the users. It features 
gamification features like points, levels, badges and titles, streaks, progress 
bars, and challenges. These elements will give rewards and feedback on the 
46 
 
user reading activities. Users can earn XP for adding books, reading pages, 
finishing books, and keeping up a reading streak, for instance. There is also a 
streak XP system, where the XP awarded varies based on the user's streak. 
This reward system fosters regular reading and promotes ongoing reading 
routines. 
 
 
Furthermore, the system features a Recommendation System, which offers 
personalized book recommendations to its users. Applies basic content-based 
filtering using metadata on a book that is available, including genre, category, 
author, and the user's reading history. This information is used to fetch and 
present book recommendations from external books sources. This method can 
be applied to the prototype because it does not need a large amount of data 
from users or complicated machine learning algorithms to come up with 
personalized recommendations. The application also can relate to external 
book APIs to help searching books and providing book information. Book 
information like title, author, category, description, cover image, page count, 
and ISBN information, is primarily taken from Google Books API. If book 
information is not available through the main API, Open Library API will be 
used as an additional or fallback source. They include functions like title 
search, author search, ISBN look-up, book retrieval using bar code and 
recommendation data look-up. Thus, external book APIs are used as services 
to deliver book metadata information to Reading Management Module and 
Recommendation System. 
 
 
The app's data layer is Firebase Cloud. Firebase Authentication is utilized to 
control user logins, enrollment and user account accesses, while Firebase 
Cloud Firestore holds user profiles, book information, progress in reading, 
gamification record and achievements, streaks, and stats in reading. The app 
is directly integrated with Firebase, enabling the system to synchronize user 
data between the application and offer dependable cloud-based storage. The 
app is directly integrated with the Firebase, allowing the system to sync user 
47 
 
data between the application and offering reliable cloud-based storage. 
Overall, the proposed system architecture would facilitate an efficient and 
user friendly mobile application by providing the user with features to support 
their reading journey, such as reading management, gamification, 
recommendation, external book APIs, barcode/ISBN lookup, and cloud based 
data storage systems, thus allowing the users to track their reading progress 
and remain motivated in the long run.. 
 
3.4 Hardware and Software Requirements 
 
This section forms an account on the software and hardware requirements to 
be employed in the development of the Gamified Mobile Application on 
Tracking Reading Progress. To facilitate development, testing, and 
evaluation of the mobile application, it will need the appropriate hardware 
and software. These specifications that are enumerated in this section 
facilitate the deployment of the proposed system during the development 
process. 
 
3.4.1 Hardware Requirements 
 
The hardware requirements would be a laptop and an Android phone. The 
laptop was to be used in application development, interface design, coding, 
and documentation whereas Android smartphone was to be used to test and 
evaluate the developed mobile application. Table 3.7 shows hardware 
specification and purpose of hardware applied in this project. 
 
Table 3. 7 Hardware Requirements 
Hardware Description Purpose 
Android 
Smartphone 
• OS: HyperOS based on Android 15 
• Chipset: MediaTek Dimensity 
8300-Ultra  
• CPU: octa-core CPU up to 3.35 
GHz 
• To run and 
test out the 
functionaly of 
this system. 
48 
 
Laptop • Processor: AMD Ryzen 5 7530U 
with Radeon Graphics          
• RAM installed: 16 GB  
• Window Edition: Window 11 
• To write all 
reports that 
need to be 
used in this 
project. 
• To write and 
run the coding 
for 
development 
of the project. 
 
The laptop is the primary development platform as it allows the execution of 
the development tools, database administration and testing of the application. 
This needs sufficient processing capability and memory so that the efficient 
code, debugging and testing can be carried out at the development stage. At 
the same time, testing of functionality and performance of the application are 
done using the Android smartphone in a mobile reality setting. It also enables 
the developer to test the system as a real user and ensure that the system is 
compatible with the Android devices. 
 
3.4.2 Software Requirements 
 
The software requirements also involve the tools of development, design and 
supporting applications needed during various stages of the project. These 
software tools have been chosen keenly to assist in documentations, system 
designing, mobile application design and data management. Table 3.8 
provides the summarization of computer software that has been utilized in 
this project and its purpose. 
 
Table 3. 8 Software Requirements 
Phase Software Description 
  Identification  Microsoft Word To document all report. 
 Mendeley Reference Manager    To insert citation and manage 
references. 
Design 
 Draw.io 
To create system 
architecture diagrams and 
flowchart for 
documentation 
 Figma 
To design UI of the 
system 
49 
 
 Stitch 
To create Storyboard and 
brainstorm idea for UI 
Development  Firebase To store and manage application data   
and user authentication. 
 Flutter To develop the mobile application  
 Visual Studio Code To write, edit, debug, and manage the 
Flutter application source code. 
 Google Books API To retrieve book information such as 
title, author, cover image, page count, 
category and ISBN.    
 Open Library API To retrieve book information as a 
fallback source when data is unavailable 
from Google Books API. 
 
The preparation of the project report and the effective handling of the 
academic references was prepared through the use of documentation tools 
like Microsoft word and Mendeley Reference Manager. Draw.io and Stitch 
and Figma were used during the design stage to design system architecture, 
flow charts and Storyboard and user interface designs. The tools were used to 
aid in proper visualization of system structure, flow of navigation and the user 
experience order so that upon implementation, no malfunctions occurred. 
 
 
For the development phase, Flutter has been applied as the primary cross-
platform framework and develop the mobile application to be able to 
implement it efficiently on the Android devices. Visual studio code was the 
integrated development environment (IDE) used to write, edit and debug the 
Flutter source code. Firebase was also incorporated to help it with data 
storage, user authentication and data synchronization on a cloud-based 
environment. Google Books API and Open Library API use to retrieve all 
books information. All these software products aided in the process of 
developing, testing, and assessing the proposed gamified mobile application 
to monitor reading progress. 
 
3.5 Conclusion 
 
In conclusion, this chapter explained the methodology that was used in the 
design of the Gamified Mobile Application to Track Reading Progress. This 
chapter has described the application of the MADLC that has five major 
50 
 
stages, which include identification, design, development, prototyping, and 
testing. Every stage was elaborated methodically to explain the way the 
application was planned, designed, developed and tested during the project. 
Moreover, this chapter provided the system architecture of the proposed 
mobile application to give a good sense of how the system elements, such as 
the reading management module, gamification module, recommendation 
system, and data storage interact with each other. The description of the 
architecture assists in the better understanding of the system structure in 
general and contributes to the process of implementing the offered 
application. Lastly, this chapter described hardware and software 
requirements that were used to support the process of development. The 
discussed specifications will be able to make the application developed, 
tested, and evaluated. On the whole, this chapter provides a solid background 
to the further chapters that are devoted to the implementation and testing of 
developed mobile application.
 
REFERENCES 
 
Ahmed, H. M. M., El-Sabagh, H. A., & Elbourhamy, D. M. (2025). Effect of Gamified, 
Mobile, Cloud-Based Learning Management System (GMCLMS) on student 
engagement and achievement. International Journal of Educational Technology 
in Higher Education, 22(1). 
 
Chen, C., Jamiat, N., & Mao, Y. (2023). The study on the effects of gamified interactive 
e-books on students’ learning achievements and motivation in a Chinese character 
learning flipped classroom. Frontiers in Psychology, 14.  
 
Khaldi, A., Bouzidi, R., & Nader, F. (2023). Gamification of e-learning in higher 
education: a systematic literature review. In Smart Learning Environments (Vol. 
10, Issue 1). Springer.  
 
Li, L., Zhang, J., Guo, Z., & Wang, Y. (2024). The Mobile Gamification for Early 
Literacy: An Analysis of Learning Outcomes and Engagement. Journal of 
Advances in Humanities Research, 3(4), 1–17.  
 
Liu, T., Li, Y., Feng, M., Chen, Y., & Zhang, T. (2023). Understanding College 
Students’ Engagement in Mobile Reading for Sustainability in Education: A Case 
Study from China. Sustainability (Switzerland), 15(3).  
 
Meng, C., Zhao, M., Pan, Z., Pan, Q., & Bonk, C. J. (2024). Investigating the impact 
of gamification components on online learners’ engagement. Smart Learning 
Environments, 11(1).  
 
Nursi, A., Darni, R., & Novaliendry, D. (2025). A Mobile Vocabulary Learning App 
for Engineering Contexts: Gamification, Self-Directed Learning, and User 
Progress Tracking. Journal of Hypermedia & Technology-Enhanced Learning, 
3(3), 262–282.  
 
Oliveira, E. R., Branco, A. C., Carvalho, D., Sacramento, E. R., Tymoshchuk, O., 
Pedro, L., Antunes, M. J., Almeida, A. M., & Ramos, F. (2022). An Iterative 
Process for the Evaluation of a Mobile Application Prototype. SN Computer 
Science, 3(4).  
 
Oliveira, M., Abelha, A., Sousa, R., & Peixoto, H. (2024). Gamification in mobile 
applications: techniques, benefits and challenges. Procedia Computer Science, 
251, 678–683.  
 
Parsons, D., Cerratto-Pargman, T., Vavoula, G., Traxler, J., Vaughan, N., Kukulska-
Hulme, A., Kitchenham, A., Holley, D., Fitzgerald, E., Yau, J., Griesbaum, J., 
Jorge, J., Specht, M., Danaher, P., Asunka, S., & Cochrane, T. D. (2021). 
EDITORS-IN-CHIEF INTERNATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD ASSOCIATE 
 
EDITORS EDITORIAL REVIEW BOARD. http://www.igi-
global.com/authorseditors/titlesubmission/newproject.aspx 
 
Rosidah, L., & Dellia, P. (2024). Library Book Recommendation System Using 
Content-Based Filtering. Internet of Things and Artificial Intelligence Journal, 
4(1), 42–65.  
 
Samrgandi, N. (2021). User Interface Design & Evaluation of Mobile Applications. 
IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, 21(1).  
 
Sarah Salim, F., Abu Bakar, Z., Maizura Mohamad Noor, N., & Mohemad, R. (2022). 
Usability in Mobile Learning Application. In Journal of Information and 
Knowledge Management (JIKM) (Vol. 1). 
 
Siafis, V., Rangoussi, M., & Psaromiligkos, Y. (2024). Recommender Systems for 
Teachers: A Systematic Literature Review of Recent (2011–2023) Research. In 
Education Sciences (Vol. 14, Issue 7). Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing 
Institute (MDPI).  
 
Anggrainy, J., Sharizan, F. P. N., Sriyanda, S., & Farhan, R. (2024). Gamifying 
Reading Motivation in EFL Students: Enhancing Engagement and Language 
Learning Through ICT. In Jurnal Simki Pedagogia (Vol. 7, Issue 1).  
 
Wang, Z., Harun, J., & Yuan, Y. (2024). ENHANCING READING INSTRUCTION 
THROUGH GAMIFICATION: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF 
THEORETICAL MODELS, IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES, AND 
MEASURABLE OUTCOMES (2020–2024). Journal of Information Technology 
Education: Research, 23, 1–27.  
 
 
