 
 
UNIVERSITI TEKNOLOGI MARA 
 
 
 
 
 
MATHANYWHERE: 
INTERACTIVE WEBSITE FOR 
LEARNING DIFFERENITATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LUTFI NAIM BIN SYAHRONIZAM 
 
 
 
 
 
BACHELOR OF COMPUTER SCIENCE 
(HONS.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JULY 2025 
 
  
 
 
UNIVERSITI TEKNOLOGI 
MARA 
 
 
 
MATHANYWHERE: 
INTERACTIVE WEBSITE FOR 
LEARNING DIFFERENITATION 
 
 
 
LUTFI NAIM BIN SYAHRONIZAM 
 
 
 
 
Report submitted in fulfilment of the 
requirements for Bachelor of Computer 
Science (Hons.)  
Faculty of Computer and Mathematical 
Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JULY 2025 
 
 
 
  
ii 
 
SUPERVISOR APPROVAL 
 
 
MATHANYWHERE: INTERACTIVE WEBSITE FOR LEARNING 
DIFFERENTIATION 
 
By 
 
LUTFI NAIM BIN SYAHRONIZAM  
2022841556 
 
This report was prepared under the supervision of the supervisor, Dr Khairulliza Binti 
Ahmad Salleh. It was submitted to the Faculty of Computer and Mathematical 
Sciences and was accepted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Bachelor of Computer Science (Hons.) 
 
 
 
Approved by 
 
 
 
Dr. Khairulliza Binti Ahmad Salleh 
Project Supervisor 
 
 
JULY 17, 2025
  
iii 
 
STUDENT DECLARATION 
 
 
I certify that this report and the project to which it refers is the product of my own 
work and that any idea or quotation from the work of other people, published or 
otherwise are fully acknowledged in accordance with the standard referring of the 
discipline. 
 
 
 
…………………….. 
Lutfi Naim Bin Syahronizam 
2022841556 
 
 
 
JULY 17, 2025
  iv  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
 
First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Allah SWT for 
granting me the strength, patience, and perseverance to complete this Final Year 
Project successfully. 
 
I would like to extend my sincere appreciation to my supervisor, Dr Khairulliza, for 
the invaluable guidance, constructive feedback, and continuous support throughout 
every stage of this project. Their expertise and encouragement have been instrumental 
in shaping this work. 
 
My heartfelt thanks also go to my parents Mama, Papa & Adik for their endless love, 
prayers, and unwavering support. Their sacrifices and encouragement have been the 
foundation of my journey. 
 
I would also like to thank all my lecturers, as well as my friends and course mates, for 
their assistance, motivation, and insightful discussions, which greatly contributed to 
the progress of this project. 
 
Finally, I am grateful to all respondents, testers, and experts who participated in the 
surveys and evaluations, providing valuable feedback that enhanced the quality of this 
research. 
 
Thank you to everyone who has supported me directly or indirectly throughout this 
journey.
v 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 
Differentiation, a core concept in calculus, is often perceived as abstract and 
challenging by students, leading to difficulties in comprehension and practical 
application. Traditional teaching methods, relying primarily on static lectures and 
textbooks, frequently fail to provide the interactive and personalized learning 
experiences needed to effectively convey such complex mathematical concepts. To 
address this gap, this project introduces MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for 
Learning Differentiation, a web-based educational platform specifically designed to 
support UiTM students studying Calculus I (MAT183 and MAT421). The platform 
integrates real-time feedback, interactive tutorials, dynamic visualization tools, and 
adaptive progress tracking to promote deeper understanding and sustained 
engagement. Developed using HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and Firebase, the system 
offers features such as a derivative calculator, function graphing tool, step-by-step 
problem-solving guidance, and achievement badges. Evaluation through expert 
reviews and user testing with 20 participants indicated high levels of satisfaction, ease 
of use, and alignment with the UiTM syllabus. Results suggest that MathAnywhere 
effectively enhances students' conceptual understanding and offers a promising 
supplement to traditional learning approaches. Future recommendations include 
expanding to additional calculus topics, improving mobile compatibility, and 
incorporating collaborative learning features. 
vi 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
CONTENT                  PAGE 
 
SUPERVISOR APPROVAL ii 
STUDENT DECLARATION iii 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT iv 
ABSTRACT v 
TABLE OF CONTENTS vi 
LIST OF FIGURES ix 
LIST OF TABLES xi 
 
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION  
 
    1.1  Background of Study 1 
    1.2  Problem Statement 2 
    1.3  Project Objectives 3 
    1.4  Project Scope 4 
    1.5   Project Significance 4 
    1.6  Conclusion 5 
 
CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW  
 
    2.1  Overview of Research Domain 7 
         2.1.1 Mathematics Education 8 
         2.1.2 Calculus and Differential Calculus 10 
    2.2   Overview of Interactive Learning Systems 11 
         2.2.1 Real-Time Feedback 11 
         2.2.2 Collaborative Learning Systems 16 
         2.2.3 Gamified Learning Systems 17 
    2.3  Comparison of Existing Systems/Applications 19 
vii 
 
         2.3.1 Khan Academy 20 
         2.3.2 WolframAlpha 21 
         2.3.3 Desmos 22 
    2.4  Justification on the Chosen Techniques and Features 24 
    2.5  Conclusion 25 
 
CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY  
 
    3.1  Introduction 27 
    3.2  Project Methodology 27 
         3.2.1 Phase 1: Define Phase 28 
         3.2.2 Phase 2: Design Phase 29 
         3.2.3 Phase 3: Development Phase 31 
         3.2.4 Phase 4: Demo & Feedback Phase 32 
         3.2.5 Phase 5: Release Phase 33 
    3.3  Summary of Project Methodology 34 
    3.4  System Architecture 36 
    3.5  Hardware & Software Requirement 37 
         3.5.1 Hardware Requirements 37 
         3.5.2 Software Requirements 38 
    3.6  Conclusion 40 
 
CHAPTER FOUR: PROJECT DESIGN, IMPLEMENTATION, AND RESULT  
 
     4.1  Introduction 41 
     4.2  Project Design 41 
         4.2.1 Use-Case Diagram 42 
         4.2.3 Flowchart 43 
         4.2.4 Data Model Design 47 
    4.3  Project Development 48 
         4.3.1 Integration of MathAnywhere 49 
         4.3.2 Developing MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for Learning 
Differentiation 50 
viii 
 
    4.4  Testing 68 
    4.5  Expert Feedback 71 
    4.6  User Feedback 73 
    4.7  Conclusion 80 
 
CHAPTER FIVE: CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION FOR FUTURE 
WORK  
 
    5.1  Introduction 81 
    5.2  Summary of Findings 81 
    5.3  Objective Achievement 82 
         5.3.1 First Objective 82 
         5.3.2 Second Objective 82 
         5.3.3 Third Objective 83 
    5.4  Limitation 83 
    5.5  Recommendation 84 
    5.6  Conclusion 85 
 
REFERENCES  
 
  
ix 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
 
FIGURE              PAGE 
2.1 Concept Map 7 
2.2 Traditional Mathematics Education 8 
2.3 Progress Tracking in Khan Academy 13 
2.4 Dynamic Visualization of Mathematical Graphs in Desmos 14 
2.5 Step-by-Step Answer Verification in WolframAlpha 15 
2.6 Interface of Khan Academy's Differential Calculus Section. 20 
2.7 Example of an interactive Problem on Limits 21 
2.8 Examples of Step-by-step Solutions 22 
2.9 Students’ views about how Desmos contribute to learning experiences 23 
2.10 Experiences in using Desmos 23 
3.1 Agile Development Cycle 27 
3.3 System Architecture of MathAnywhere: Interactive website for Learning 
Differentiation 36 
4.1 Use-Case Diagram of MathAnywhere 43 
4.2 User Authentication Flowchart Diagram 44 
4.3 Main Application & Tools Flowchart Diagram 45 
4.4 Profile, Progress & Achievements Flowchart Diagram 46 
4.5 Firestore Database Structure 48 
4.6 Sign-in and Sign-up screen 51 
4.7 Coding Snippets of Sign-in Function 53 
4.8 Coding Snippets of Sign-up Function 56 
4.9 Home Page Screen 57 
4.10 Coding Snippets of Home Page Function 58 
4.11 Topics Section 59 
4.12 Coding Snippets of Module Page Function 60 
4.13 Derivative Calculator 61 
4.14 Graphing Tool 61 
4.15 Coding Snippets of Derivative Calculator Javascript Function 62 
4.16 Coding Snippets of Graph Generation JavaScript Function 64 
x 
 
4.17 MathAnywhere Achievement Badges 64 
4.18 Coding Snippets of Achievement System 66 
4.19 Overall Student Progress 67 
4.20 Student Learning Progress by Difficulty Level 67 
4.21 Coding Snippets of Progress Update 68 
4.22 Overall Impression based on Expert 71 
4.23 Evaluation of the pedagogical structure employed by MathAnywhere 72 
4.24 Recommendation for future improvement of the MathAnywhere platform 72 
4.25 Feedback regarding on how well MathAnywhere addresses the needs of its target 
audience 73 
4.26 Gender and Age Distribution 74 
4.27 Participants reference for using educational websites 75 
4.28 User feedback on the intuitiveness of MathAnywhere 76 
4.29 User Feedback on Content Alignment with UiTM Syllabus 77 
4.30 User Feedback on the Speed of MathAnywhere compared to Traditional 
textbooks 78 
4.31 User Feedback on the Clarity of Step-by-Step Explanations 78 
4.32 User Likelihood of Recommending MathAnywhere 79 
  
xi 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
 
TABLE               PAGE 
2.1 Comparison of Interactive Learning Systems 18 
2.2 Comparison of Learning Platforms for Learning Differentiation 24 
3.1 Overview of Define Phase 29 
3.2 Overview of Design Phase 30 
3.3 Overview of Development Phase 32 
3.4 Overview of Demo & Feedback Phase 33 
3.5 Summary of Project Methodology 34 
3.6 Hardware Requirements 37 
3.7 Software Requirements 38 
4.1 Functionality Testing 69 
 
 
1 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
This chapter presents an introduction to the project. The chapter starts with the 
background of study followed by the problem statement. Afterwards, the project 
objectives are outlined, and the scope of the study is defined. The chapter ends with 
an explanation of the project’s significance.  
  
1.1 Background of Study  
   
Over the years, the role of technology in the classroom has become more 
prominent generally, but especially in higher-level courses such as calculus. 
One of the key concepts in calculus is differentiation, which described the 
behaviour and functioning of various functions (Grizzle, 2025). Fields such as 
engineering, physics, economics, and many others applied differentiation to 
determine rates of change, optimize processes, and conduct data analysis. Due 
to its algebraic nature, sophistication, and the level of mathematical experience 
required to solve real-life problems, differentiation was often considered a 
difficult concept for students, yet it remained a vital knowledge. Traditional 
methods like textbooks and lectures often lacked the practical experience and 
personalized feedback necessary for a deep understanding of complex ideas. 
Disparities in teaching methods also hindered students’ capacity to apply 
differentiation in more advanced contexts (Tian & Wahid, 2024). While 
textbooks and lectures were essential, they frequently lacked the engagement 
and tailored feedback needed for better knowledge retention. This lack of 
interactive instruction methods made topics harder to learn and further limited 
students’ understanding of differentiation. These challenges, however, could be 
addressed through interactive learning platforms, where the pace and approach 
to learning were controlled by the students themselves.  
2 
 
 
To solve this problem, there was a need to develop interactive interfaces that 
incorporated graphical and multimedia animations as well as real-time 
decision-making tools to enhance communication of mathematical concepts 
and related resources (Ming Chew et al., 2022). These tools facilitated active 
learning, enabled students to review challenging ideas, and provided 
personalized feedback, thus enhancing their comprehension of differentiation 
(Li et al., 2023). This project aimed to provide an interactive and flexible 
learning platform for learning differentiation, intending to address the 
shortcomings of conventional teaching techniques and foster a more inclusive 
and effective educational environment. 
   
1.2 Problem Statement  
  
Ideally, having the ability to draw or visualize what one was learning in 
mathematics would have been greatly helpful in the long run. Students would 
have been able to consider differentiation from a more practical perspective, 
especially when supported by diagrams, graphs, and detailed breakdowns of 
general problem-solving processes. It would also have been useful for students 
to have alternative methods or tools like those they accessed in other learning 
environments, rather than learning the concept of differentiation solely through 
traditional approaches.   
  
However, many students failed to understand the basics of differentiation even 
though it was a fundamental topic included in calculus and had practical real-
world applications. Students often reported feeling overloaded and frustrated 
with differentiation because of its abstract nature and the challenges they 
encountered when applying differentiation rules in various situations (Zaharin 
et al., 2021). Although conventional classroom teaching was effective for 
covering foundational content, it might not have provided students with the 
one-on-one attention and individualized practice needed to fully grasp the 
underlying ideas. Teachers in large classes might not have had enough time to 
support each student individually or to adapt their lessons to suit different 
3 
 
learning preferences (Jamaluddin et al., 2017). According to past research, 
students faced difficulties in solving differentiation problems due to the lack of 
interactive and adaptive learning tools that could provide them with instant 
feedback and guidance (Tian & Wahid, 2024).  
 
Most current online platforms are somewhat static, making it difficult for 
students to see how differentiation works or to get feedback that is relevant to 
their own struggles. Consequently, students frequently take in knowledge 
without actively seeking it out, leading to diminished effectiveness in terms of 
long-term retention and comprehension. Most of the learning tools available 
today do not have visual aid capabilities (e.g. graphs and problem-solving 
process breakdown), so students have no choice but to depend on theoretical 
explanations, which may not be enough to help them develop practical 
problem-solving abilities (Aini Jaafar et al., 2022). Hence, it is evident that 
there is a need for a platform that offers individualized feedback, interactive 
problem-solving activities, and real-time graphing. 
 
To solve some of the issues, this project suggested creating a web-based tool 
with a focus on differentiation concepts. This alternative teaching method 
crafted for students complement real-time graphing, a calculator for a 
derivative equation, and provide feedback on students’ problem solving to 
prepare students for real-life application of the concept. 
  
1.3 Project Objectives  
  
The objectives of this project are:  
  
I. To design an interactive web-based educational platform for 
studying differentiation.  
II. To develop an interactive web-based educational platform for 
studying differentiation that provides tailored feedback according to 
student performance. 
III. To assess the platform’s usability, interactivity, and the effectiveness 
of its feedback through user testing and expert evaluation. 
4 
 
1.4 Project Scope  
  
This project is intended for UiTM students who are studying MAT183 and 
MAT421 which are the course codes for Calculus I (Diploma and bachelor’s 
degree level), with a particular emphasis on those who require more practice 
and a more thorough comprehension of differentiation. The platform was 
developed as a web-based application and was constructed based on the 
calculus syllabi of Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM) to align with the 
educational setting. The website uses English as the medium of teaching to 
meet the requirements of UiTM students.  
 
In contrast to previous research that explored additional information through 
constrained variable exploration, this platform allowed students to alter 
variables and immediately see the consequences, thus facilitating active 
exploration to enhance the overall learning environment and provide real-life 
experience. By using adaptive assessments and quizzes, the learning 
experience was tailored to match each student’s level of understanding. 
 
Customized learning paths and personalized feedback were provided to address 
individual needs and guide students in areas where they required additional 
support. The platform enabled students to manipulate variables to observe real-
time outcomes, fostering active exploration and delivering a more engaging, 
hands-on learning experience. Additionally, the learning experience was 
further customized through adaptive quizzes and assessments, allowing 
students to monitor their progress and strengthen their understanding.  
 
1.5  Project Significance  
  
The significance of this project lies in transforming the conventional methods 
of teaching and learning differentiation into a more personalized and 
innovative approach to course delivery. Students received better instruction 
and practice since the platform offered a personalized learning approach that 
catered to their needs and performance levels. This customization was essential 
5 
 
to address specific areas where students encountered difficulties, making 
learning easier and more efficient.  
 
By incorporating elements such as feedback, quizzes, and graphics, the 
platform enhanced students’ engagement and activity. Differentiation was often 
a complicated concept to grasp since it was abstract and not concrete. However, 
the features of dynamic visualizations and real-time problem-solving activities 
made the subject more comprehensive and user-friendly than many similar 
resources. These characteristics encouraged students to take an active role in 
their learning, manipulate variables that affected their understanding, and study 
outcomes, allowing them to gain a deeper understanding of the concepts.  
 
Furthermore, the platform’s web-based architecture provides seamless 
accessibility and adaptability. The learning resources are accessible to students 
at any time and from any location, allowing them to learn at their own pace and 
convenience. This feature is especially advantageous for students who are 
exceedingly occupied or who require additional time to review complex 
subjects. In general, the project’s objective is to develop an educational 
resource that is both adaptable and inclusive, enabling students to conquer 
differentiation in a manner tailored to their unique learning style. Additionally, 
this platform offers significant value to lecturers by serving as a supplementary 
teaching tool. It allows lecturers to monitor students’ progress more effectively, 
identify areas where students face challenges, and provide targeted support. By 
integrating this web-based platform into their teaching strategies, lecturers can 
enhance classroom engagement, deliver more personalized instruction, and 
promote a more interactive and student-centered learning environment.  
  
1.6 Conclusion  
 
In this chapter, the idea behind the creation of a web-based, interactive learning 
platform designed to assist students in learning differentiation was presented. 
The goal was to make the process of studying more individualized to meet each 
student’s needs, thereby making the understanding of calculus more effective. 
6 
 
The platform that was developed aimed to explain complex ideas clearly and 
to keep students motivated through animated explanations and related 
interactive tools. It served as an effective addition to mainstream instructional 
strategies, offering greater flexibility for students to control their own learning 
process and enabling them to study at their own convenience, at their preferred 
time, and in their preferred place. Altogether, the objective of this effort was to 
provide students with the essential support they needed to confidently 
understand and apply differentiation in their studies and future professions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
7 
 
CHAPTER 2 
 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
 
This section discusses research related works and related studies concerning to the 
project in discussion. The chapter presents the outcome of a review conducted on 
books, journals, articles, and other research sources concerning the project, which 
emphasizes interactivity and mathematics, specifically differential calculus. In 
addition, it examines the strategies available to create an interactive learning system 
in web-based learning environment; real-time feedback during learning process; real 
time performance indicators; and visualization tools. Also, the review highlights other 
platforms and systems in use in mathematics education currently, with details, its 
advantages, and disadvantages. This comparison reveals lack of elements in the 
existing solutions and lays the foundation for proposing an interactive environment for 
learning about differentiation in calculus. 
 
 
Figure 2.1 Concept Map  
    
2.1  Overview of Research Domain  
 
Mathematics is a core competency in problem-solving and abstract thinking 
processes, which are determent to scientist and other STEM education students. 
However, teaching and learning have been a thorny issue in the school more so 
8 
 
when conveying concepts from simple knowledge areas to complex areas of 
study such as calculus. This means that the transition is often challenging 
because students have mismatches in their prior knowledge of such common 
concepts as variables and functions (Thompson & Harel, 2021). Moreover, 
inequalities in access to quality resources and technological tools worsen 
performance gaps among students from different socioeconomic backgrounds.  
For example, Boulaaras et al. (2023) highlight that students in underprivileged 
communities often lack access to modern educational tools, which hinders their 
ability to engage with interactive learning platforms and deepens the 
educational divide. Solving these challenges needs basic knowledge and 
understanding of the conceptual and pragmatic questions of mathematical 
learning, especially of differential calculus, to offer effective strategies which 
boost the interest of students and their results.  
  
 
   Figure 2.2 Traditional Mathematics Education  
(Source: https://iep.jsu.edu/degrees/undergraduate/arts-humanities-
sciences/mcis/mathematicstraditional.html)  
  
 2.1.1 Mathematics Education   
  
Mathematics learning involves various learning contents such as calculus, 
probability, geometry and so on that are vital for building analysis proficiency. 
These domains provide the prerequisites for the subsequent work and calculus 
assumes an important function because of its substantial applicability for 
solving practical problems as well as its significance in connecting science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines (Thompson & Harel, 
2021).  
   
9 
 
There are primary, secondary and tertiary Mathematics education in Malaysia, 
and the curriculum is designed to provide the basic skills and building a pathway 
to advanced skills. At the primary level, students are instructed to learn numeracy 
in arithmetic and geometric shape and measurements initially. Teaching algebra, 
trigonometry and bit of calculus in second year of secondary education demands 
different cognitive processes. In the tertiary level, students, study differential and 
integral calculus, linear algebra and statistical methods in more advanced and 
special field in preparation for STEM careers. Nevertheless, there are structured 
levels, yet transitional difficulties are likely to arise, particularly when 
instructing concepts such as calculus. Restricted access to educational resources 
and technology is a significant factor influencing learning outcomes. Recent 
modifications aimed to render education technology-centric and individualized 
(Fazwan Kharuddin et al., 2021).  
 
Classroom teaching through lecturing is a common approach which serves more 
to teach content by rote and less for learning with understanding or meaningful 
links to practice. This approach minimizes the interaction and dominion of such 
attributes and especially in things like differentiation (Barana et al., 2021). 
Additionally, limited access to resources and technologies exacerbates learning 
disparities, especially in underprivileged communities (Boulaaras et al., 2023).  
  
This project aims at filling these gaps by directing its emphasis on the teaching 
and learning of differentiation in the context of calculus only. The use of such 
forms as interactive tools and feedback facilities should improve students’ 
interest levels and promote improved knowledge regarding the concept in 
question. These manipulatives give students the ability to see symbolic 
representations and how they translate to the geometric and the practical 
application. Such feedback enhances this process through real-time provision 
that allows for emergent corrections of any wrong practices making the students 
continue to be engaged in their learning processes. By these innovations, the 
hope of this project is to develop an integrated and flexible learning system that 
addresses the need of the students. 
  
10 
 
2.1.2 Calculus and Differential Calculus   
 
Calculus is an essential domain of the learning of mathematics that enables the 
description and analysis of processes involving change. But because of this 
abstract nature, it became difficult for students to grasp and then apply. Students 
encounter significant difficulties in grasping the basic concepts, like limits, 
derivatives and integrals, as concepts separated from each other, rather than 
being a family of concepts. Calculus is an abstract knowledge to this end and 
consequently differential calculus cannot be applied in the practical situation 
since it is disconnected (Thompson & Harel, 2021). Moreover, the extensive 
knowledge acquisition necessary for integrating theory with problem-solving 
can be overwhelming for students, particularly when there is insufficient 
support and foundation in the courses provided (Biza et al., 2022).   
 
Differential calculus is a crucial component of calculus, yet it is complex due 
to its integration of algebra and geometry. Students frequently struggle to 
connect algebraic representations with geometric representations, such as the 
slopes of tangent lines and rates of change (Ely, 2021). It is unfortunate that 
conventional teaching methods fail to integrate visual aids, which could bridge 
this gap, resulting in students lacking sufficient context to comprehend these 
concepts. Moreover, the absence of application-based integration hinders 
students’ engagement and diminishes the significance of differentiation in 
practical contexts (Torres-Peña et al., 2024). The research indicates that the 
practical application of mathematical theories significantly enhances student 
engagement and understanding, particularly for concepts lacking obvious real-
world relevance, such as calculus (Barana et al., 2021).  
 
This is a concern because, despite the availability of numerous tools for creating 
effective graphs in classrooms, their implementation is not always realized. Due 
to constraints such as limited resources and insufficient teacher training, the 
implementation of most of these technologies is inadequate (Boulaaras et al., 
2023). To address these challenges, educational systems must guarantee that 
students in all schools have secure and efficient access to these technologies, 
11 
 
and that teachers engage in continuous professional development to effectively 
integrate these tools into instruction.  
  
2.2  Overview of Interactive Learning Systems  
 
This research area focuses on interactive learning systems, as Integrated 
Systems components like Real-time Feedback Systems, Collaborative Systems 
and Gamification Learning Systems. There are aspects of the learning process 
in mathematics education, especially within calculus, that are included. 
However, differentiate the specific advantages and disadvantages. This 
proposed project is a real-time feedback system due to its ability to provide 
immediate feedback thus encourages students to interact with it and ultimately 
aid in concept retention when it comes to learning Calculus. It discusses the 
components, why they are important to the chosen project focus and challenges 
faced when dealing with these components.  
  
2.2.1 Real-Time Feedback  
 
Real-time feedback systems are crucial in contemporary learning models, 
particularly in mathematics and STEM education, where responses occur in 
real-time, addressing students' actions. These systems tackle a fundamental 
challenge in education: delayed feedback, which can adversely affect students 
by reinforcing incorrect understandings without anyone available to correct 
them (Barana et al., 2021). Given that students can readily identify errors 
during the initial phases of computing, real-time feedback serves as an optimal 
instrument to maintain both learner engagement and the learning process. The 
primary advantage of a real-time feedback system lies in its provision of 
continuous feedback to students. Certain features may serve as process 
indicators, facilitate user interaction with visualizations, provide answer 
verification mechanisms, adjust to learning preferences through suggested 
pathways, and incorporate game-related incentives such as badges and 
rewards. However, not all these features are applicable to this project. While 
adaptive pathways and gamified elements are valuable in some contexts, this 
project were focus on three key features: process indicators, interactive tools 
12 
 
with visual feedback, and answer verification systems. These were examined 
thoroughly in the following sections.  
  
I.    Progress Indicators  
  
Lesson completion, accuracy and proficiency level work as a progress indicator 
which monitor students' mastery of learning outcomes in real-time. These tools 
allow the students to gauge their work and locate their areas of failure or areas 
where they are still not up with the work. For instance, Khan Academy offers 
basic report card tools to demonstrate the progress of students in different areas 
and to give students a certain level of self-control of the learning journey  
(Barana et al., 2021).  
  
Although all progress tracking tools effectively enhance motivation, they 
frequently lack precision. Normally, they will give students’ an average strategy 
score without mentioning the areas where the disposal might have been a task. 
This is a limitation which prevents educators from filling the learning gaps of 
their students. To help progress indicators be even more effective, by 
integrating progress bar displays that are more enhanced and customizable and 
adjusted to individual student needs. Introducing practice aids, like tools that 
recommend tailored suggestions to specific students, or tools that identifies 
common mistakes, can substantially improve learning outcomes (Nakamoto et 
al., 2023).  
  
Adding progress indicators can even further add to student engagement. 
Milestones are tracked as elements that leave an interactive experience that 
motivates students to stay with their education. This tool, in addressing these 
challenges, can be a great transformational tool in education especially in such 
subjects such as mathematics and calculus.  
  
13 
 
 
Figure 2.3 Progress Tracking in Khan Academy  
(Source: https://www.khanacademy.org/khan-for-educators/k4e-
usdemo/xb78db74671c953a7:using-course-mastery-on-khan-
academygr/xb78db74671c953a7:using-khan-academy-s-activity/a/help-your-students-track-
theirlearning)   
  
II. Interactive Tools and Visual Representation Feedback 
 
Graphing calculators and other dynamic visualisation tools are very valuable 
when it comes to teaching students concepts in mathematics. It is helpful in 
showing the user a graphical representation of functions as the user learns them 
which helps close the gap between theory and practise.  
 
For instance, on a platform such as Desmos, students could enter equations, and 
see the corresponding graphs directly, opening a new way of exploring 
derivatives and integrals in their mathematical sense (Nakamoto et al., 2023). 
Graphing tools work best to show the connections between symbolic 
representations and geometric interpretations. Research shows that dynamic 
visualizations help students see, for example, the slope of a tangent or the area 
under a curve more easily than they would in a static context (Ely, 2021). It 
does not do anything to teach students how their abstract thoughts have 
practical effects, building a deeper, more robust foundation for solving issues 
that are even more difficult. While effective, interactive tools often do not have 
integrated theoretical guidance or brochure explanations of how to do step-by-
step problem solving. For instance, though tools like Desmos do a great job at 
visualization, it is still missing tailored instructional components as well as a 
 
14 
 
theoretical justification of the visual outputs that have accomplished (Hajizada 
et al., 2022). Being unable to escape this limitation can’t prevent students from 
fully connecting the observed outputs to underlying mathematical principles.  
  
A vision of these tools is expanded to address the need for adaptive feedback 
systems and to incorporate educational features. Studies indicate that when by 
combining visual tools with contextual explanations and personalized feedback 
on similar abstract concepts it will lead to significant increase in comprehension 
and retention of such abstract concepts (Torres-Peña et al., 2024). When 
addressing these limitations, tools can become a more complete resource to 
mathematics education, especially in facilitating more conceptual 
understanding of calculus.  
 
 
     Figure 2.4 Dynamic Visualization of Mathematical Graphs in Desmos 
(Source: https://www.desmos.com/calculator) 
  
III.   Answer Verification Systems  
  
Important tools in modern education are the answer verification systems which 
allow to provide students with immediate detailed feedback about 
correct/incorrect answers, quiz suggestions etc. These systems 'break down' the 
complex problems into simpler, more manageable steps that help students to 
see where they went wrong and to understand why correct solutions are correct. 
For example, students have come to love WolframAlpha for its step-by-step 
solutions, which not only build confidence but also help students become 
stronger problem solvers (Hajizada et al., 2022). However, these systems give 
 
15 
 
the students clear explanations of every step, allowing students to focus on an 
understanding of the process rather than ‘getting’ the right answer. By learning 
iteratively, it is reinforced learning of key concepts and reduces the probability 
of recurring on error. According to research, detailed feedback of this sort 
dramatically improves comprehension and retention of mathematical principles 
especially in difficult areas like calculus (Torres-Peña et al., 2024).  
 
A drawback of many answer verification systems, however, is that they are 
static. They are exceptional at clarifying predetermined ideas but cannot 
determine how to adjust to assorted learning styles or to essentially believe the 
individual misconceptions of their students in a spontaneous manner. However, 
the inability to adapt can prevent personalized learning, especially for students 
who need individual or simple rephrased instructions (Ely, 2021).  
 
To compensate these shortcomings, these can be improved by integrating 
dynamic and interactive feedback with answer verification systems, thereby 
increasing their flexibility and responsiveness. Such systems can address 
students learning needs, by analysing students’ responses and providing 
suitably tailored feedback to ensure intervention to the gaps in understanding. 
These features reduce problem guessing and improve the efficacy of answer 
verification systems to promote conceptual understanding and long-term 
mastery of mathematical concepts.   
  
 
Figure 2.5 Step-by-Step Answer Verification in WolframAlpha  
(Source: https://www.wolframalpha.com/examples/pro-features/step-by-step-solutions)    
 
16 
 
 2.2.2 Collaborative Learning Systems   
 
Collaborative Learning Systems exploit peer interaction in which students can 
share their insights and solve problems together. However, such systems 
promote critical thinking and teamwork in the important search for a robust 
understanding of these mathematical concepts. Students tend to share goals, 
negotiate solutions to problems, and interact and depend on each other to 
degrees that are critical to effective collaborative learning during collaborative 
activities (Garcia et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025). 
 
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) has become a leading 
paradigm that brings digital tools for collaboration and to improve learning 
outcomes. CSCL uses technologies like forums, shared workspaces and instant 
messaging to facilitate communication of the students so effectively. It is shown 
that this approach improves cognitive and social development in collaborative 
tasks. For instance, Garcia et al. (2024) demonstrated that multi-device support 
in collaborative design systems helped students contribute more to the 
conversation and pulled in individual and group learning. Furthermore, the 
integration of transparent learning analytics enables real-time monitoring and 
supports individual accountability, ensuring that all participants actively 
contribute (Zhou et al., 2024). 
 
Collaborative systems often include interactive hints and tips, which give 
students suggestions on what to do without outright answering the students. 
Firdaus et al. (2021) discussed how collaborative exercises were encouraged by 
platforms like Khan Academy for users to become engaged with and even 
participate in problem solving with each other. All this is made possible 
similarly by tools like eMUSE, a tool which integrates collaborative features 
into a social media platform, to allow students to exchange ideas and educators 
to monitor their progress (Garcia et al., 2024). 
 
However, there are still problems in the effective implementation of 
collaborative learning systems. It is just the case that students who learn well 
17 
 
alone or need tailored instruction struggle to get full advantage of collaborative 
setups. Moreover, it is difficult for educators to evaluate group work and elicit 
contributions by individual students in a group setting. Due to this limitation, 
there is usually an uneven workload distribution with some of the students 
underperforming while others try to compensate (Garcia et al., 2024). 
 
Features of collaborative learning systems to overcome these challenges are 
necessary they should facilitate group engagement while ensuring individual 
accountability. Real-time monitoring systems, such as transparent learning 
analytics dashboards, can aid in tracking contributions and motivate fair 
participation (Zhou et al., 2024). Furthermore, calibrating instruments to 
measure collaboration effectively, as suggested by Garcia et al. (2024), can 
improve the reliability of these systems in supporting educational outcomes. 
  
2.2.3 Gamified Learning Systems   
 
The idea of gamified learning systems is built on the idea that the systems use 
game mechanics, like points, badges, and leaderboards, to increase student 
engagement and motivation. These systems convert abstract concepts into 
engaging and approachable experiences by transforming traditional learning 
activities into interactive experiences. For instance, Khan Academy offers 
badges when students have completed exercises, whereas Brilliant.org follows 
the puzzles and challenges to stimulate students’ critical thinking. It has been 
established during research that gamification boosts student participation in and 
interest for mathematics education (Nurbekova et al., 2022; Tah Jutin & Binti 
Maat, 2024). 
 
Nevertheless, systems that incorporate gamification often privilege 
entertainment over deep learning and therefore gamified examinations of 
advanced topics such as differentiation can be superficial by nature. To 
overcome this, gamification should be accompanied with other features that put 
attention to conceptual understanding and skill improvement (Aguirre Acosta 
& Espinola Carballo, 2022). Moreover, poorly designed gamification can 
18 
 
hinder learning by reducing intrinsic motivation and promoting shallow 
interaction (‘ghost effect’) (Anselme & Hidi, 2024). 
 
Each of the three types of interactive learning systems mentioned real-time 
feedback systems, collaborative learning systems, and gamified learning 
systems can provide unique functionalities to help in mathematics education. 
They seek to touch different parts of the learning experience, serving up 
different benefits and hurdles. Considering that this system is a real-time 
system, in which it gives immediate corrective feedback, it is an active learning 
feedback mechanism that also eliminates misconceptions as they happen. The 
project aims to increase engagement and strengthen conceptual understanding 
in the learning of calculus, focusing on how to master differentiation by 
emphasizing the use of real-time feedback systems. The contributions of the 
three interactive learning systems to effective learning are illustrated in Table 
2.1. 
 
Table 2.1 Comparison of Interactive Learning Systems  
 Feature/ 
Aspect  
Real-Time Feedback 
System  
Collaborative Learning 
system  
Gamified Learning 
System  
Core 
Functionality  
provides immediate  
corrective feedback of 
students’ actions to  
reducing 
misconceptions and 
promoting active 
learning.  
Enhances peer to peer 
interaction and creates  
teamwork for  
problem solving and 
critical thinking.  
Uses game elements 
like  
points, badges,  
and leaderboards to 
boost  
engagement and 
motivation.  
Primary 
Benefits  
o enables users to 
improve 
engagement 
through instant 
error correction.  
o Individualized 
learning pathways.  
o Encouraged active 
problem-solving.  
o It improves 
communication and 
teamwork ability.  
o Promotes mutual 
learning and  
o differences of 
opinion.  
o Builds a sense of 
community.  
o Makes learning 
pleasant and 
interactive.  
o Increases student 
motivation via 
rewarding.  
o Improves the 
participation in 
routine tasks.  
Limitations  o Requires reliable 
infrastructure for 
real-time 
processing.  
o Frequent 
corrections may 
'overwhelm' 
students.  
o Less suited to 
students who  
o prefer to learn 
independently.  
Not easy to 
evaluate claims of 
individual 
contributions.  
o Rewards may get 
in the way of 
conceptual 
understanding.  
19 
 
Technologica
l 
Tools/Compo
nents  
o Immediate 
feedback.  
o Adapted for 
progress indication. 
o Interactive 
visualization tools.  
o Shared online 
workspaces.  
o Real time 
collaboration and 
messaging tools.  
o Peer discussion 
forums.  
o Points and 
rewards systems.  
o Quizzes and 
challenges are 
game like.  
o Interactive 
elements of 
storytelling.  
Example 
Platforms  
Platforms incorporating 
instant feedback like  
certain LMS systems 
and custom tools for 
STEM education.  
Computer- 
Supported  
Collaborative  
Learning (CSCL) tools 
such as Google  
Workspace for  
Education,  
Microsoft Teams, etc.  
Khan Academy  
(gamified elements),  
Brilliant.org, 
Duolingo.  
Suitability for 
Calculus  
Basically, effective in 
correcting 
differentiation concept 
through  
immediate correction 
and step by step 
feedback.  
It’s useful for 
collaborative discussion 
of complex  
problems, but not so 
effective for individual 
skill building in  
abstract topics like 
STEM and art.  
Good for maintaining  
engagement on  
the foundational 
topics, however, does 
not have a  
lot of depth for the 
larger  
concepts of calculus.  
Focus of 
Project  
The project focuses on 
this system to provide 
real-time feedback, 
improve engagement, 
and  
enhance conceptual 
understanding. 
Not integrated as a 
primary  
component of the 
project.  
Not integrated as a 
primary component of 
the project. 
  
2.3 Comparison of Existing Systems/Applications  
  
Desmos, Khan Academy, WolframAlpha and other educational platforms have 
played an essential role in developing mathematics education due to its 
distinctive features. Each system deals with different parts of the learning 
process visualization, guided practice and problem solving. Yet, these 
platforms are significantly lacking in key features, such as providing true real-
time feedback, personalized learning paths, and comprehensive support of 
mastery of more advanced topics like differentiation. The strengths and 
limitations of both are analysed in detail in the following sections.  
  
  
20 
 
2.3.1 Khan Academy  
 
Khan Academy, on the other hand, is a very popular educational platform which 
includes interactive videos, structured exercises and automatic progress tracking 
across subjects’ mathematics included. Being a systematic approach, with 
interactive exercises and real time progression tracking, it effectively improves 
mathematical foundation learning (ULUM, 2023).  
  
The platform provides instant feedback and uses visual aids, such as graphs and 
interactive examples, to make abstract concepts like differentiation more 
accessible. But that is static and not adaptive for, say, differentiation or higher 
calculus. It closes educational inequities by providing free access to quality 
content, yet its dependence on self-driven learning poses a challenge to some 
students who need direction instruction or find difficulty in motivating themselves. 
Even as an excellent supplementary tool, Khan Academy needs adaptations in 
adaptive feedback and personalized support to fit all learning needs. 
  
 
Figure 2.6 Interface of Khan Academy's Differential Calculus Section.  
(Source: https://www.khanacademy.org/profile/me/progress)   
 
21 
 
 
Figure 2.7 Example of an interactive Problem on Limits  
(Source: https://www.khanacademy.org/profile/me/progress)   
  
2.3.2 WolframAlpha  
 
Wolfram Alpha is a well-known computational engine that is heavily capable 
of solving complex mathematical problems including calculus. It gives 
detailed, step-by-step solutions and generates visual graphs to make abstract 
things such as differentiation, integration, etc. more intuitive, helping the 
student to relate their algebraic computations to geometric interpretations (Nur 
et al., 2020).  
  
This allows students to understand calculus better, by computing derivatives, 
and showing the slopes of tangent lines. Besides, it may be used in dealing with 
advanced items like limits and integration by substitution. In the classroom, 
however, WolframAlpha's solution focus rather than interactive learning means 
it has its drawbacks. It is a weaker resource for use in interactive instruction 
due to lacking adaptive feedback and personalized guidance and is best suited 
as a supplementary tool for self-directed students.  
  
 
22 
 
 
Figure 2.8 Examples of Step-by-step Solutions  
(Source: https://www.wolframalpha.com/examples/pro-features/step-by-step-solutions)    
  
2.3.3 Desmos  
 
Desmos is a user friendly & innovative graphing calculator platform that pairs 
interactive exploration of mathematical functions with environment, context, 
and community to help educators and students learn by doing. In allowing real 
time graph manipulation, it makes complex calculations, like differentiation 
and integration easier to understand. According to (Chechan et al., 2023), 
Desmos enhances students' understanding of function properties through 
dynamic graph interaction and immediate visualization of changes.  
  
Desmos is a key strength because it allows students to make abstract concepts 
into something easy to understand and students can visualize relationships 
between the algebraic and geometric representations by playing with features 
of a graph such as parameters. It is challenged however, by factors such as 
limited familiarity with digital tools, and technical constraints. Despite these 
limitations, Desmos remains a powerful supplementary tool for promoting 
mathematical exploration and conceptual understanding. With its intuitive 
interface and real time visualization, it is a great tool for facilitating the use of 
calculus in classroom to help engage and promote learning for students.  
  
 
23 
 
 
Figure 2.9 Students’ views about how Desmos contribute to learning experiences  
(Source: Chechan et al., 2023)  
  
  
  
Figure 2.10 Experiences in using Desmos 
(Source: Chechan et al., 2023) 
 
In the following table 2.2 outlined three outstanding options for learning 
differentiation by comparing key features, strengths, and limitations. Each 
platform offers unique tools to aid learning: Khan Academy offers videos of 
interactive experience with step-by-step solutions, WolframAlpha provides the 
symbolic differentiation solving with more detail, Desmos is the best platform 
for graphing and visualization. Although these tools are valuable resources, 
they do have their limitations, for example the tools lack the ability to provide 
  
  
24 
 
real time adaptive feedback or tailored learning features, which are mentioned 
to help guide users in selecting the most appropriate platform for their needs.  
  
Table 2.2 Comparison of Learning Platforms for Learning Differentiation 
System/Application  Key Features  Strengths  Limitations  
Khan Academy  Interactive videos, 
step-by-step 
solutions  
Wide accessibility, 
high-quality content  
Lacks real-time 
adaptive feedback 
for differentiation  
WolframAlpha  Symbolic  
differentiation  
solver, step-by-step 
guides  
Provides detailed 
solutions and 
explanations  
Focuses more on 
answers than 
interactive learning  
Desmos  Graphing and 
visualization tools  
Excellent for graph-
based calculus 
learning  
Limited in 
providing  
personalized 
feedback  
MathAnywhere: 
Interactive 
Website for 
Learning 
Differentiation  
Real-time 
feedback, process 
indicators,  
interactive tools,  
answer verification 
systems  
Provides immediate 
corrective feedback,  
personalized learning 
pathways, and  
conceptual  
understanding through 
interactive features  
Requires 
significant  
development and 
resources for 
implementation  
 
2.4 Justification on the Chosen Techniques and Features  
  
This project was motivated by challenges in mathematics education, in calculus 
and differentiation, in particular. Students find traditional lectures which 
emphasize rote memorization to be far from engaging or helpful in connecting 
to more abstract concepts (Thompson & Harel, 2021). Understandably, many 
of the learning students with struggling with the differentiation fundamentals, 
including the geometric interpretation of derivatives and its relation to real 
world applications constrain their problem-solving skills (Ely, 2021). 
Visualisation and computation tools such as Desmos and WolframAlpha are 
adept in this area but are restricted to their use in visualisation and computation 
without real time feedback, personalised learning pathways and contextual 
application (Barana et al. 2021; Torres-Peña et al. 2024).  
  
Based on the importance of real time feedback for dealing with misconceptions 
instantly and encouraging active learning Hajizada et al. (2022), this project 
intends to design an interactive learning system that is based on such feedback. 
Students are guided by Progress indicators that keep track of their performance, 
25 
 
find gaps, and keep the students engaged with complex topics like 
differentiation (Nakamoto et al., 2023).  
  
Interactive visualization tools are used to bridge the gap between abstract 
calculus theories and their geometric interpretations through dynamic 
exploration of algebraic and geometric concepts that enhance conceptual 
understanding (Torres-Peña et al., 2024). Desmos offers strong graphing, but 
this project adds to that by including guided explanations and interactive 
problem solving.  
  
Lastly, answer verification systems offer detailed, purpose specific feedback to 
facilitate learning and build self-confidence. The goal of this project is to build 
on tools such as WolframAlpha by adding personalized and interactive 
mechanisms for providing feedback (Barana et al., 2021).  
  
This platform fills gaps in current educational tools by combining real time 
feedback, progress indicators, interactive visualization tools, and answer 
verification systems to increase engagement, increase understanding, and 
promote personalized learning differentiation.  
  
2.5 Conclusion   
 
In this chapter, the challenges of mathematics education, primarily in 
differential calculus, were discussed and the ways that modern technologies can 
help solve these challenges were analysed. However, traditional methods of 
teaching to learn the basics of differentiation through learning these abstract 
concepts, typically do not explain what concepts they are trying to teach or 
engage the student enough to make the concepts clearer. Furthermore, useful 
existing platforms including Desmos, Khan Academy, or WolframAlpha do not 
have crucial capability that is real time feedback, personalized learning paths 
and adaptive scaffolding towards the needs of individual students.  
 
Real time feedback systems were shown to provide immediate corrective 
responses that fostered active learning and therefore greater engagement and 
26 
 
understanding. The review process revealed key features like interactive tools, 
visualizations, and mechanisms to verify answers as important constituents in 
simplifying the complex concepts for personalized learning. The results of 
these findings serve as the foundation of the proposed project, where a robust 
real time feedback system tailored towards perfecting differentiation learning 
was developed. The system attempts to fill gaps in the existing tools in 
education by integrating immediate feedback with interaction tools, enhance 
students' conceptual understanding and provide a personalized engaging 
learning experience.  
  
27 
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
 
METHODOLOGY 
 
 
3.1 Introduction 
 
This chapter presents the methodology that was employed in developing the 
Interactive Website for Learning Differentiation. The Agile Prototyping 
approach was selected for its iterative and user-focused nature, allowing 
continuous refinement through regular testing and feedback. This methodology 
supports flexibility in addressing project objectives, ensuring a user-centered 
and functional platform. 
 
3.2 Project Methodology 
 
The chosen methodology for developing the Interactive Website for Learning 
Differentiation is the Agile Development Methodology, a structured and 
flexible framework known for its adaptability and suitability in fast-changing 
environments. Agile was selected to enable a phased approach that supports 
continuous improvements, frequent feedback, and iterative development to 
meet project objectives effectively (Behrens et al., 2021). Figure 3.1 illustrates 
the Agile Development Cycle planned for this project. 
 
 
Figure 3.1 Agile Development Cycle 
 
28 
 
As the project is undertaken individually, the Agile methodology is adapted to 
focus on iterative self-assessments and improvements rather than collaborative 
feedback. The phases of this methodology Define, Design, Develop, Demo and                                                                                      
Feedback, Release phase was taken through evaluations based on predefined 
user needs and testing scenarios. 
 
While Agile typically involves collaboration and feedback from stakeholders, 
this project modifies the methodology to fit the sole developer framework. 
Feedback was gathered through self-assessment and usability testing based on 
anticipated user needs, which were identified during the Define phase. This 
ensures the iterative nature of Agile is preserved, even in the absence of direct 
user input. 
 
This methodology supports a systematic approach to the project by breaking it 
into manageable phases and allowing for iterative refinement at each stage. By 
focusing on flexibility and user-centred design principles, the Agile 
methodology ensures that the resulting platform meets its functional and non-
functional requirements effectively while aligning with the project’s overall 
objectives. 
 
3.2.1 Phase 1: Define Phase 
 
The Define Phase for MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for Learning 
Differentiation focuses on identifying and analysing the requirements 
necessary to develop a functional and user-friendly platform. As the project is 
undertaken by a sole developer, this phase emphasizes an independent 
exploration of anticipated user needs, project goals, and technical feasibility. 
Key features, such as interactive tutorials, progress tracking, and personalized 
feedback mechanisms, were identified through a review of existing educational 
platforms, academic literature, and user-centred design principles. Instead of 
formal user stories, a prioritized list of functionalities was prepared to guide 
the development process. 
 
29 
 
Given the absence of external collaborators or users during this phase, iterative 
planning and self-assessment were applied to manage the scope and maintain 
clarity. Challenges in defining comprehensive requirements were addressed by 
focusing on high-value features and ensuring flexibility to adapt as 
development progresses (Hoy & Xu, 2023). This phase provides a solid 
foundation for the project, aligning the planned functionalities with the 
project’s objectives and setting the stage for structured development in 
subsequent phases. 
 
Table 3.1 Overview of Define Phase 
Phase Activities Technique/software Deliverables 
Define Identify project objectives, 
scope, and needs based on 
Chapter 1. 
Microsoft Word Documented project 
objectives and scope. 
Analyse literature to 
identify relevant 
methodologies and 
techniques for interactive 
learning. 
Mendeley 
Reference Manager 
Comprehensive literature 
review summary. 
Specify functional and non-
functional 
requirements based on 
findings from Chapter 1 
and 2. 
Microsoft Word Systems requirements 
and objectives document. 
 
3.2.2 Phase 2: Design Phase 
 
The Design Phase for MathAnywhere: Interactive Learning Website for 
Learning Differentiation focuses on planning a functional and user-friendly 
system design tailored to the project’s objectives. The design process 
emphasizes independent planning, prototyping, and iterative self-reviews to 
ensure alignment with the goals established during the Define Phase. Tools 
such as Figma and Diagrams.net (Draw.io) was used to create basic prototypes, 
30 
 
wireframes, and workflow diagrams to visualize the platform’s features, 
including interactive tutorials, progress tracking, and personalized feedback 
mechanisms. 
 
The phase prioritizes simplicity and essential features to ensure feasibility 
within the project’s scope. The process relies on self-assessment and adherence 
to best practices for usability and functionality. While modular and scalable 
design principles are considered, the focus remains on delivering core 
functionalities that address the project’s primary objectives. Planned activities 
also include simulated user interaction tests to identify potential usability 
issues. 
 
This phase is expected to result in a comprehensive design blueprint, including 
wireframes and workflow diagrams, which was serve as a foundation for the 
Development Phase. These planned deliverables aim to ensure that the platform 
design aligns with the objectives defined in Chapter 1 and the insights gained 
from Chapter 2. Table 3.2 summarizes the planned activities for the Design 
Phase. 
 
Table 3.2 Overview of Design Phase 
Phase Activities Technique/software Deliverables 
Design Draft the graphical user 
interface (GUI). 
Figma User-friendly and 
interactive website UI. 
Create wireframes for key 
features. 
Canva Wireframes for tutorials 
and feedback systems. 
Visualize system 
architecture and workflows. 
Draw.io System architecture 
diagrams. 
Refine prototypes based on 
feedback. 
Google Form Improved UI and feature 
prototypes. 
 
The user interface (UI) and user experience (UX) designs were planned with a 
focus on simplicity, intuitiveness, and engagement. Key UI elements were 
31 
 
designed to ensure seamless navigation through interactive tutorials and 
feedback sections. Figure 3.2 illustrates the planned UI/UX design concepts for 
the website. 
 
 
Figure 3.2 UI/UX Design Concepts for MathAnywhere Website 
 
3.2.3 Phase 3: Development Phase 
 
The Development Phase for MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for Learning 
Differentiation were focus on implementing core platform features using Agile 
methodologies. By leveraging the principles of the Agile Influence and Impact 
Model (AIIM), the planned development process was emphasizing iterative 
sprints, early testing, and flexibility to address evolving requirements, ensuring 
high-quality outputs and alignment with project objectives (Neumann & 
Diebold, 2024). 
 
Each sprint is planned to deliver functionalities such as user authentication, 
lesson modules, and progress tracking, with iterative reviews and testing to 
refine these features. Test-driven development (TDD) will guide the coding 
process to maintain quality, and modular design principles was applied to 
ensure scalability and reusability of components. Front-end technologies like 
HTML, CSS, and JavaScript were used, while Firestore were handle back-end 
32 
 
functionality. Continuous integration (CI) tools were explored to streamline 
testing and deployment, enabling the identification and resolution of issues 
efficiently. The goal of this phase is to create a functional and adaptable 
platform integrating all core elements such as interactive tutorials and progress 
tracking, with potential for future enhancements. Table 3.3 outlines the planned 
process for the Development Phase. 
 
Table 3.3 Overview of Development Phase 
Phase Activities Technique/Software Deliverables 
Development Write and debug the code 
for the platform. 
WebStorm A fully functional 
platform integration 
core feature. 
Implement features like 
user authentication, 
tutorials, and progress 
tracking. 
Firestore, HTML, 
CSS, JavaScript 
Completed core 
functionalities. 
Test system components 
iteratively. 
Test-Driven 
Development (TDD) 
A scalable and 
reusable system 
architecture. 
Conduct continuous 
integration and 
deployment. 
Continuous Integration 
(CI) Tools 
A platform ready 
for deployment and 
future 
enhancements. 
 
3.2.4 Phase 4: Demo & Feedback Phase 
 
The Demo and Feedback Phase for MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for 
Learning Differentiation is planned to focus on gathering feedback through 
self-assessment and user interactions, as the project is being developed 
individually without external stakeholders. The phase was involve evaluating 
key features such as interactive tutorials, progress tracking, and personalized 
feedback mechanisms to ensure they align with the project’s objectives and 
anticipated user needs. Feedback was systematically documented and 
prioritized for refinement in subsequent sprints. User feedback was used to 
identify usability and functionality gaps, with adjustments made iteratively to 
improve the platform. Agile practices such as self-reviews and iterative 
refinements were to ensure effective adaptation to evolving project 
33 
 
requirements (Ghimire & Charters, 2022). The planned outcome of this phase 
is a refined platform with improved interactivity and usability, laying the 
groundwork for final deployment. Table 3.4 outlines the planned activities for 
the Demo and Feedback Phase. 
 
Table 3.4 Overview of Demo & Feedback Phase 
Phase Activities Technique/Software Deliverables 
Demo & 
Feedback 
Simulate user 
interactions and 
evaluate platform 
features. 
Browser Testing, 
Manual review 
Insights on platform 
usability and 
functionality. 
Document findings and 
prioritize areas for 
improvement. 
Microsoft word Documented list of 
refinements. 
Refine platform based 
on findings from self-
assessment. 
Agile planning tools Updated and 
improved platform 
addressing 
feedback. 
Conduct usability 
testing to validate 
refinements. 
Manual observation, 
Browser testing 
Finalized platform 
with enhanced 
usability. 
 
3.2.5 Phase 5: Release Phase 
 
The Release Phase for MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for Learning 
Differentiation focuses on the final steps required to ensure the platform is 
ready for future deployment and use. As this is a Final Year Project (FYP) and 
not an actual production-level project, this phase emphasizes the preparation 
of testing, documentation, and evaluation rather than actual deployment. 
Guided by the principles outlined during earlier phases, this phase was aimed 
to finalize the platform’s readiness for potential real-world usage. 
 
The phase was including user & expert testing to validate the platform’s 
functionality and usability. These simulations were identified and address any 
potential usability issues or design flaws, ensuring the system aligns with the 
objectives set in earlier phases. Deliverables for this phase was including 
comprehensive documentation, such as user guides and system architecture 
34 
 
references, to support future maintenance or deployment efforts. By focusing 
on thorough testing and preparation, this phase ensures that the platform meets 
its defined objectives and lays a foundation for potential scalability and further 
enhancements (Almeida & Bálint, 2024). 
 
3.3 Summary of Project Methodology 
 
The project methodology for developing MathAnywhere: Interactive Website 
for Learning Differentiation is designed to provide a structured yet flexible 
framework for addressing the project objectives. Table 3.5 summarizes how 
each objective aligns with the corresponding phases, activities, and 
deliverables, ensuring a systematic progression throughout the project's 
lifecycle. 
 
This approach highlights the iterative nature of the methodology, emphasizing 
clear planning, execution, and evaluation steps to meet the project’s goals. The 
integration of detailed activities and deliverables across each phase ensures the 
project remains on track and focused on delivering a functional and user-
friendly platform. 
 
Table 3.5 Summary of Project Methodology 
Objectives Phases Activities Deliverable 
 
Define 
❖ Identify project 
objectives, scope 
and platform goals. 
 
❖ Conduct 
literature review on 
differentiation 
learning and tools. 
 
❖ Documented 
project 
objectives, 
scope and goals. 
 
❖ Literature 
review 
summary. 
 
35 
 
To design an 
interactive web-
based educational 
platform for 
studying 
differentiation. 
Design 
❖ Develop wireframes 
and prototypes of the 
website interface. 
 
❖ Create system 
architecture and data 
flow diagrams. 
 
 
 
❖ Initial wireframes 
and system 
architecture 
diagrams. 
 
❖ Visualize platform 
layout. 
 
To develop an 
interactive web-
based educational 
platform for 
studying 
differentiation that 
provides tailored 
feedback according 
to student 
performance 
Development 
 
❖ Implement user 
authentication, 
interactive tutorials, and 
progress tracking 
features  
 
❖ Build front-end and 
back-end systems 
 
❖ Perform iterative testing 
and debugging  
 
❖ Refine features for 
usability and accuracy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
❖ Functional platform 
modules. 
 
❖ Tested system ready 
for the next phase. 
 
❖ Debugged and 
validated system 
components 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To assess the 
platform’s 
usability, 
interactivity, and 
the effectiveness of 
its feedback 
through user 
testing and expert 
evaluation 
Demo & 
Feedback  
❖ Conduct usability 
testing sessions with 
potential users. 
 
❖ Document feedback and 
refine features  
❖ User feedback 
documentation  
 
❖ Improved platform 
features 
36 
 
 
Release  
❖ Finalize the platform 
for presentation. 
 
❖ Prepare project 
documentation and user 
guide  
❖ Finalized platform 
ready for 
demonstration 
 
❖ Completed 
documentation for 
evaluation  
 
3.4 System Architecture 
 
The system architecture for MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for Learning 
Differentiation is designed to streamline user interaction and ensure seamless 
navigation through its core functionalities. The architecture incorporates 
various components, such as user interfaces, server-side applications, and a 
database system, to provide an intuitive and interactive learning environment. 
The platform caters to students by delivering personalized and interactive 
tutorials and progress-tracking mechanisms. Figure 3.3 illustrates the system 
architecture of the website. 
 
 
Figure 3.3 System Architecture of MathAnywhere: Interactive website for Learning Differentiation 
 
37 
 
Figure 3.3 shows the MathAnywhere platform's architecture begins with a 
straightforward development and deployment pipeline. Code is developed 
locally using the WebStorm IDE and then committed to a central GitHub 
repository. This repository is connected to GitHub Pages, which automatically 
deploys the static files HTML, CSS, and JavaScript creating a live, publicly 
accessible website without the need for a traditional web server. 
 
When a user visits the website on their device, the browser loads and runs the 
application directly. This client-side application contains all the interactive 
features, such as the tutorials, progress indicators, and user profiles. For 
dynamic functionality, the application communicates directly with Firebase, 
which handles all backend services. This includes managing user 
authentication for logins and signups, as well as reading and writing all 
application data to the Firestore database. 
 
3.5 Hardware & Software Requirement 
 
The development of the Interactive Learning Website for Learning 
Differentiation required specific hardware and software components to ensure 
efficient design, development, testing, and deployment. This section details the 
hardware and software specifications that was used during the development 
process. 
 
3.5.1 Hardware Requirements 
 
The hardware components used for this project include a laptop for 
development and testing of the website. Table 3.6 lists the specifications and 
descriptions of the hardware used for this project. 
 
Table 3.6 Hardware Requirements 
Specification Description 
Name Acer Nitro an515-55 
Processor Intel(R) Core (TM) i7-10750H CPU @ 2.60GHz   2.59 GHz 
38 
 
RAM 16 GB 
Operating 
System 
Windows 11 
Function To run development tools (e.g.,WebStorm, GitHub, Firebase) and 
browsers for website testing 
 
The Acer Nitro was chosen for its reliable processing capabilities, adequate 
RAM. These specifications ensured seamless performance of development 
tools like WebStorm, Firebase, and Figma, as well as effective website testing 
in modern browsers such as Safari and Chrome. Its stable OS Windows 11 
environment provided a robust platform for Agile-based development, 
ensuring efficient coding, debugging, and iterative testing processes. 
 
3.5.2  Software Requirements 
 
Software requirements were integral components of the development 
infrastructure, defining the essential tools that enabled the creation and 
functionality of the Interactive Website for Learning Differentiation. These 
software tools played critical roles in the development, testing, and deployment 
phases. Table 3.7 lists the software used along with their descriptions. 
 
Table 3.7 Software Requirements 
Software Description 
 
WebStorm 
To write, debug, and manage the website’s code during development. 
 
Firebase 
To manage and store user data, including progress tracking and lesson 
content, API development for seamless communication between the 
front-end and back-end systems. 
39 
 
 
Figma 
To design the graphical user interface (GUI) and wireframes for the 
platform. 
 
Diagram.net 
To create system architecture diagrams and flowcharts for 
documentation. 
 
Google Forms 
To gather user feedback during the demo and testing phases. 
 
Microsoft 
Word 
To draft and finalize project documentation. 
 
Mendeley 
To manage references and citations for research-related documentation. 
 
The software tools listed above served essential functions in ensuring the 
success of the project. WebStorm played a central role in writing and 
debugging the platform's code, while Firestore supported API development for 
seamless communication between the front-end and back-end systems. 
Firebase handled all database operations, ensuring secure and reliable data 
storage. Design tools like Figma and Diagrams.net were instrumental in 
creating user interfaces and visual representations of the system. Google Forms 
enabled efficient collection of user feedback, while Microsoft Word facilitated 
detailed project documentation. Finally, Mendeley Reference Manager ensured 
proper acknowledgment of research sources, enhancing the credibility of the 
project. 
 
  
40 
 
3.6 Conclusion 
 
In conclusion, this chapter presented a comprehensive overview of the project 
methodology, highlighting the Agile Development Methodology adopted for 
the development of MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for Learning 
Differentiation. Each phase of the methodology, including Define, Design, 
Development, and Demo & Feedback, was discussed in detail, offering a clear 
understanding of the sequential development process. 
 
The system architecture was outlined, showcasing the structural representation 
of the website’s components and their interrelationships, including the web 
server, and database. The chapter also detailed the hardware and software 
requirements, ensuring that the necessary resources were in place for the 
effective development and operation of the platform. This comprehensive 
exploration provided a strong foundation for the subsequent stages of the 
project, ensuring that the objectives were met efficiently while aligning with 
the needs of the target users.  
41 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 
 
PROJECT DESIGN, IMPLEMENTATION, AND RESULT 
  
 
4.1 Introduction  
  
This chapter presents the design, results and findings derived from the 
development of MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for Learning 
Differentiation, which was made to overcome the difficulties which students 
encounter when introduced to the abstract nature of calculus, especially 
differentiation. The system supported by interactive tutorials, real time 
feedback, visualization tools, and individual progress tracking will combine to 
increase the engagement and comprehension of students via a more practical, 
responsive and student centered learning environment. These outcomes are 
arranged according to the project goals so as to make clear the effectiveness of 
all the parts, and the discussion section elaborates these results against 
available studies in the field so as to reveal the possible contribution of this 
system to enhancing mathematics education, in particular, in the topics that are 
usually hard to be mastered with trends of traditional teaching. 
 
4.2 Project Design  
 
The MathAnywhere Website was designed in such a way that simplicity, 
functionality, and interactivity would be the main characteristics of good 
design that can enhance learning. This interface was created manually by direct 
coding without any external designing tool like Figma or Canva, using HTML 
JavaScript and CSS. System architecture incorporates the front-end interface 
designed with a backend based on Firestore, and the database management is 
performed with Firebase to save data about the user, their progress, and 
learning resources. The site will be hosted on Github, and this has a stable and 
secure cloud hosting system, making it easy to access and scale up. To enable 
students to get more actively involved into the idea of differentiation, visualize 
42 
 
mathematical problem solving and get the immediate feedback, important 
features were designed and implemented including interactive tutorials, real-
time feedback systems, dynamic graphing and progress dashboards. 
 
4.2.1 Use-Case Diagram  
 
The use case diagram will describe the interaction of users with 
MathAnywhere Website. Users begin by signing up, a first quiz, and profile. 
The system allows the recommendation of suitable modules using a level 
placement algorithm based on their performance. Topics can be chosen, and 
the learning module can be taken with hints offered as needed. Once they have 
finished quizzes, they get scores and feedback and can have a second chance. 
Its users are continuously supported and engaged in their learning process 
through the system which monitors their progress, rewards their achievements, 
and authenticates their mastery. Use case diagram of the system is presented in 
figure 4.1. 
 
43 
 
Figure 4.1 Use-Case Diagram of MathAnywhere 
 
4.2.3 Flowchart 
 
I. User Authentication   
 
The flowchart based on figure 4.2 illustrates the user authentication process for 
the MathAnywhere platform, beginning when a user decides to either sign up 
or sign in. To a new user, the system will check the credentials that a user 
provides, write the details into the database, and authenticate the account with 
Firebase Authentication, and generate a user session. In case of a current user 
existed, the system checks their credential against Firebase and retrieves 
his/her profile in the database and then creates a session. Incase of any error 
like an incorrect input signal or case of authentication failure, a suitable 
44 
 
message is served to make the user enter the correct data. Both successful paths 
will join up at the end and direct the authenticating user through Connector (A) 
to main application. 
 
 
Figure 4.2 User Authentication Flowchart Diagram 
 
  
45 
 
II. Main Application & Tools  
 
The flowchart in figure 4.3 illustrates the main application loop, which begins 
after a user is authenticated via Connector (A). At the central decision hub, the 
user can choose to use the derivative calculator, generate a graph, navigate to 
their profile, or logout. If a tool is selected, the system takes user input, calls a 
predefined subroutine for the calculation, and displays either a result or an error 
before returning the user to the central hub. Choosing to view the profile 
redirects the flow to Connector (B), which leads to the profile page logic, while 
selecting logout terminates the session, ending the process. 
 
 
Figure 4.3 Main Application & Tools Flowchart Diagram 
 
III. Profile, Progress & Achievements 
 
Figure 4.4 shows the flowchart process of the generation of the profile page of 
the user has been described in the flowchart starting at Connector (B). The 
system will initially retrieve the profile and the progress of the user in the 
database after which the username and level will be shown on screen. It then 
46 
 
goes into a do... loop to iterate through each difficulty level, to calculate the 
average progress and the amount of passed modules and change the UI with 
this data. The page reveals unlocked achievement data after processing all 
levels by a subroutine that scans through all the unlocked achievements and 
results are available in the page. Lastly, this process ends at the same 
application hub by which the user was targeted through Connector (A) to 
navigate further on 
 
 
Figure 4.4 Profile, Progress & Achievements Flowchart Diagram 
 
  
47 
 
4.2.4 Data Model Design  
  
As the system runs on Firebase, a NoSQL cloud database is used as opposed to 
a relational database. Although Firebase does not use hard relational concepts 
such as Entity-Relationship Diagram (ERD), the logical structure of the data is 
based on the collection-document model where the key actors in the system are 
mapped. The key sets designed in the Firebase Firestore are the following ones: 
 
 Users Collection: Stores user information such as userID, email, display 
name, user role, current level, and profile data. 
 Topics Collection: Contains documents for each differentiation topic, 
including topic name, description, difficulty levels, and related modules. 
 Modules Collection: Sub-collection under each topic, which holds 
detailed learning materials, tutorials, and exercises for different difficulty 
levels (Novice, Intermediate, Advanced). 
 Assessments Collection: Stores initial diagnostic quiz data, questions, and 
assessment results used for level placement. 
 Progress Collection: Tracks individual user progress, including completed 
modules, quiz results, mastery status, and recommended next topics. 
 Achievements Collection: Maintains records of badges and achievements 
unlocked by users based on their learning progress. 
Graphing Collection: Stores recent graphing activity logs and user inputs 
for dynamic visualization features. 
 
As shown in figure 4.5, the MathAnywhere database in the Cloud Firestore can 
have its information communicated with similar collections, with the only 
difference that its central collection is defined as `users`, where each document 
is linked to a particular registered user through its own unique User ID. The 
chosen user file demonstrates the structure of the data as arranged in the fields, 
in the case of achievements system. It has a hierarchy of objects that specify 
several achievements with their titles, descriptions and an icon and with a 
boolean value `unlocked` to keep a check of the achievement obtained by the 
user. This NoSQL, hierarchically organised database enables the application to 
48 
 
efficiently save and load customised user data, e.g. advents and achievements 
to give a consistent, customised experience over sessions 
 
 
Figure 4.5 Firestore Database Structure 
 
 Although Firebase does not enforce direct relationships between collections, 
references between collections are managed programmatically to ensure data 
consistency. As an example, every progress document will refer both to the 
user document and to the topic document it belongs to. Such a loosely bound 
data structure can be capable of dynamic scaling related to real-time 
processing, flexible interaction feedback, and trouble-free cross-platform 
accessibility of the interactive learning system. 
 
4.3 Project Development 
 
The development of the MathAnywhere website was carried out using an 
Agile-based iterative approach, where the system was continuously improved 
through multiple development phases. The front-end interface of the platform 
is made with HTML, CSS, JavaScript, whereas the Firebase platform was used 
to implement authentication, deploy and host the application on the cloud, and 
manage the NoSQL database. The architecture of the system provided the 
49 
 
possibility of synchronizing all data in real-life, which made it possible to 
provide the features like instant feedback, progress and achievement systems, 
and make this kind of interaction possible. The key modules: user registration, 
tutorials based on topics, dynamic graphing tools, interactive quizzes with real-
time feedback were developed as the focus of each sprint. At every 
development cycle, simulated user testing was carried out to find out usability 
problem areas and improve user flows and system stability. It was able to do 
this by using Firebase cloud hosting, which offered a perfect deployment, 
scalability, and accessibility to users as they could visit the platform anytime 
and anywhere. The final system incorporates several elements into a functional 
and friendly learning environment that enables students to learn differentiation 
by keeping the students actively involved and learning differently. 
 
4.3.1 Integration of MathAnywhere 
 
MathAnywhere is an interactive learning tool that enhances students to learn 
differentiation via interactive learning. The development includes numerous 
modules i.e. tutorials, interactive exercises, quizzes, real-time visualization 
tools. It embraced the full use of HTML, CSS and JavaScript to create a clean 
responsive and an easy navigable frontend interface. As the primary backend 
platform, Firebase took care of user authentication, data synchronization in 
real-time, and cloud hosting, which enables the ability of students to access the 
system at any desired time and any desired device. 
 
Integration of MathQuill is among the main properties as the student can 
submit their written mathematical equations in a complete form, and it can be 
simpler to work on differentiation tasks with notations requiring complication. 
An interactive graphing feature is also incorporated in the system as students 
are now able to graph mathematical functions, tangent lines, and the results of 
differentiation in real-time. The visualization aids students to grasp the abstract 
concept in mathematics as they visualize the graphical representation of the 
problem. 
 
50 
 
The progress of the students going through system is automatically stored in 
Firebase. The system provides personal goals and progress, mastery 
recognition, and achievable rewards according to their performance. 
Incorporation of real-time feedback on the quizzes is a feature that enables 
students to learn on their mistakes as they occur and provides hints that will 
direct students towards the proper solution. All these ingredients have made the 
overall interactive learning experience to focus on helping students to learn 
about differentiation in a manner, which is livelier and more effective overall. 
 
4.3.2  Developing MathAnywhere: Interactive Website for  
 Learning Differentiation  
 
The development of MathAnywhere was carried out using HTML, CSS, and 
JavaScript for the frontend, while Firebase handled authentication, real-time 
database, and hosting services. Each module such as tutorials, quizzes, 
graphing tools, and progress tracking was developed separately and later 
integrated into one system. MathQuill was used for mathematical input, 
allowing students to enter differentiation problems easily. The graphing 
module helped students visualize functions and derivatives in real-time. 
Simulated user testing was done throughout development to ensure 
functionality and improve user experience. Continuous debugging and testing 
were conducted until the final version was fully functional and ready for 
deployment. 
 
I. Sign-in and Sign-up  
 
The login and signup pages handle user authentication and registration 
processes for the MathAnywhere platform. The login page validates user 
credentials and, upon successful verification and email confirmation, navigates 
the user to the level selection screen. If there are issues, such as incorrect 
credentials or an unverified email, the page displays appropriate error 
messages. The signup page manages new user registration by validating the 
form, creating a new user account, and sending a verification email. After 
51 
 
successful registration, the user is signed out and shown a success message, 
while any issues such as an already used email trigger error notification. 
Additionally, the forgot password page facilitates password reset by validating 
the user’s email and sending a password reset link. If the email is found, the 
user receives the reset link and a success message is shown, whereas an 
unrecognized email results in an error message. Figure 4.6 showcases the app’s 
registration, sign-in, and password reset functionalities. 
 
 
Figure 4.6 Sign-in and Sign-up screen 
 
52 
 
window.signIn = async function () { 
    const email = document.getElementById("email").value; 
    const password = 
document.getElementById("password").value; 
 
    if (!email || !password) { 
        document.getElementById("loginError").style.display 
= "block"; 
        document.getElementById("loginError").textContent = 
"Please enter both email and password."; 
        return; 
    } 
 
    try { 
        showLoading(); 
        const userCredential = await 
signInWithEmailAndPassword(auth, email, password); 
        const user = userCredential.user; 
 
        // Get user data from Firestore 
        const userRef = doc(db, "users", user.uid); 
        const userDoc = await getDoc(userRef); 
 
        if (userDoc.exists()) { 
            const userData = userDoc.data(); 
            const username = userData.username || 
user.email.split('@')[0]; 
            
            // Set consistent session storage for existing 
users 
            sessionStorage.setItem("userName", username); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("username", username); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("userEmail", 
user.email); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("level", userData.level 
|| "Beginner"); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("progress", 
userData.progress || "0"); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("moduleProgress", 
JSON.stringify(userData.moduleProgress || {})); 
            
            // Set analytics data if available 
            if (userData.masteryData) { 
                sessionStorage.setItem("masteryData", 
JSON.stringify(userData.masteryData)); 
            } 
            if (userData.learningPath) { 
                sessionStorage.setItem("learningPath", 
JSON.stringify(userData.learningPath)); 
            } 
            if (userData.achievements) { 
                sessionStorage.setItem("achievements", 
JSON.stringify(userData.achievements)); 
            } 
        } else { 
            // Create comprehensive user document for new 
users 
            const username = user.email.split('@')[0]; 
            const newUserData = { 
                username: username, 
53 
 
                email: user.email, 
                level: "Beginner", 
                progress: 0, 
                moduleProgress: {}, 
                overallProgress: 0, 
                weakTopics: [], 
                recommendations: [], 
                practiceAttempts: {}, 
                correctAnswers: {}, 
                createdAt: new Date().toISOString(), 
                lastUpdated: new Date().toISOString() 
            }; 
            
            await setDoc(userRef, newUserData); 
            
            // Set session storage for new users 
            sessionStorage.setItem("userName", username); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("username", username); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("userEmail", 
user.email); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("level", "Beginner"); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("progress", "0"); 
            sessionStorage.setItem("moduleProgress", "{}"); 
        } 
 
        hideLoading(); 
        alert("✅ Signed in successfully!"); 
        window.location.href = "index.html"; 
    } catch (error) { 
        hideLoading(); 
        document.getElementById("loginError").style.display 
= "block"; 
        
        // Display user-friendly error messages 
        let errorMessage = "Sign in failed. Please try 
again."; 
        switch (error.code) { 
            case 'auth/user-not-found': 
                errorMessage = "No account found with this 
email. Please sign up first."; 
                break; 
            case 'auth/wrong-password': 
                errorMessage = "Incorrect password. Please 
try again."; 
                break; 
            case 'auth/invalid-email': 
                errorMessage = "Please enter a valid email 
address."; 
                break; 
        } 
        
        document.getElementById("loginError").textContent = 
errorMessage; 
    } 
}; 
Figure 4.7 Coding Snippets of Sign-in Function  
 
 
54 
 
Figure 4.8 shows a function manages the user sign-up process. It collects the 
email, password, confirm password, and (optionally) username from input 
fields, performing validation to ensure all fields are filled, passwords match, 
and the password is at least six characters long. If validation passes, it creates 
a new user account using Firebase authentication. Upon successful account 
creation, it saves a comprehensive user profile to Firestore with default 
beginner values and stores key user information in session storage. The user is 
then welcomed and redirected to their profile page. If any errors occur, such as 
an existing account, invalid email, or weak password, a clear error message is 
displayed to guide the user. Loading indicators are shown and hidden 
appropriately during the process. 
 
window.signUp = async function () { 
    const email = document.getElementById("email").value; 
    const password = 
document.getElementById("password").value; 
    const confirmPassword = 
document.getElementById("confirmPassword").value; 
 
 
    // Validation 
    if (!email || !password || !confirmPassword) { 
        document.getElementById("loginError").style.display 
= "block"; 
        document.getElementById("loginError").textContent = 
"Please fill in all fields."; 
        return; 
    } 
 
 
    if (password !== confirmPassword) { 
        document.getElementById("loginError").style.display 
= "block"; 
        document.getElementById("loginError").textContent = 
"Passwords do not match."; 
        return; 
    } 
 
 
    if (password.length < 6) { 
        document.getElementById("loginError").style.display 
= "block"; 
        document.getElementById("loginError").textContent = 
"Password must be at least 6 characters long."; 
        return; 
    } 
 
 
    try { 
        showLoading(); 
55 
 
        const userCredential = await 
createUserWithEmailAndPassword(auth, email, password); 
        const user = userCredential.user; 
 
 
        // Get username from user input or use email 
        let username = 
document.getElementById("username").value; 
        if (!username) { 
            username = user.email.split('@')[0]; 
        } 
 
 
        // Save comprehensive user data to Firestore 
        const newUserData = { 
            username: username, 
            email: user.email, 
            level: 'Beginner', 
            progress: 0, 
            moduleProgress: {}, 
            overallProgress: 0, 
            weakTopics: [], 
            recommendations: [], 
            practiceAttempts: {}, 
            correctAnswers: {}, 
            createdAt: new Date().toISOString(), 
            lastUpdated: new Date().toISOString() 
        }; 
        
        await setDoc(doc(db, "users", user.uid), 
newUserData); 
 
 
        // Set consistent session storage 
        sessionStorage.setItem("userName", username); 
        sessionStorage.setItem("username", username); 
        sessionStorage.setItem("userEmail", user.email); 
        sessionStorage.setItem("level", "Beginner"); 
        sessionStorage.setItem("progress", "0"); 
        sessionStorage.setItem("moduleProgress", "{}"); 
        sessionStorage.setItem("practiceAttempts", "{}"); 
        sessionStorage.setItem("correctAnswers", "{}"); 
 
 
        hideLoading(); 
        alert("✅ Account Created Successfully! Welcome to 
MathAnywhere!"); 
        window.location.href = "profile.html"; 
    } catch (error) { 
        hideLoading(); 
        document.getElementById("loginError").style.display 
= "block"; 
        
        // Display user-friendly error messages 
        let errorMessage = "Account creation failed. Please 
try again."; 
        switch (error.code) { 
            case 'auth/email-already-in-use': 
                errorMessage = "An account with this email 
already exists. Please sign in instead."; 
56 
 
                break; 
            case 'auth/invalid-email': 
                errorMessage = "Please enter a valid email 
address."; 
                break; 
            case 'auth/weak-password': 
                errorMessage = "Password is too weak. Please 
choose a stronger password."; 
                break; 
        } 
        
        document.getElementById("loginError").textContent = 
errorMessage; 
    } 
}; 
Figure 4.8 Coding Snippets of Sign-up Function 
 
II. Home page 
 
The home page of MathAnywhere serves as the main landing page for users 
after successful login or account creation. It is designed to be simple, 
welcoming, and informative. At the top of the page, the navigation bar allows 
users to easily access different sections such as Lessons & Exercises, Journey, 
Graphing Tool, and user profile options. The center of the page features the 
platform’s branding and tagline “Anywhere, Anytime, Anyplace,” 
emphasizing the accessibility of the system. A welcome section introduces the 
developer and highlights key features such as the graphing tool and lesson 
modules. The layout is visually engaging, using colors, icons, and hover effects 
to guide users interactively. The home page acts as a dashboard that sets the 
tone for the entire learning experience, encouraging users to explore and begin 
their differentiation journey. Figure 4.9 illustrates the home page of the 
website. 
 
57 
 
 
Figure 4.9 Home Page Screen 
 
Figure 4.10 shows the function listens for the page to finish loading and then 
checks if a user is logged in using Firebase authentication. If the user is signed 
in, it retrieves their username and level (from session storage or defaults), 
updates the welcome message and level display on the page, shows user-
specific content, and hides any login prompts. If the user is not signed in, it 
redirects them to the sign-in page. Additionally, it defines a navigation function 
that directs users to different lesson pages based on their current level, or to a 
quiz page if no level is set. 
 
document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() { 
    // Check if user is logged in 
    onAuthStateChanged(auth, (user) => { 
        if (user) { 
            // User is signed in 
            const username = 
sessionStorage.getItem('username') || 
user.email.split('@')[0]; 
            const level = sessionStorage.getItem('level') || 
'Beginner'; 
            
            // Update welcome message 
            const welcomeElement = 
document.getElementById('welcome-message'); 
            if (welcomeElement) { 
                welcomeElement.textContent = `Welcome back, 
${username}!`; 
            } 
            
            // Update level display 
            const levelElement = 
document.getElementById('user-level'); 
            if (levelElement) { 
                levelElement.textContent = `Current Level: 
${level}`; 
            } 
58 
 
            
            // Show user-specific content 
            const userContent = 
document.querySelector('.user-content'); 
            if (userContent) { 
                userContent.style.display = 'block'; 
            } 
          
            const loginPrompt = 
document.querySelector('.login-prompt'); 
            if (loginPrompt) { 
                loginPrompt.style.display = 'none'; 
            } 
            
        } else { 
            // User is not signed in 
            window.location.href = 'Sign-in.html'; 
        } 
    }); 
    window.navigateToLessons = function() { 
        const level = sessionStorage.getItem('level') || 
'Beginner'; 
        switch(level) { 
            case 'Novice': 
                window.location.href = 'Novice.html'; 
                break; 
            case 'Intermediate': 
                window.location.href = 'Intermediate.html'; 
                break; 
            case 'Advanced': 
                window.location.href = 'Advanced.html'; 
                break; 
            default: 
                window.location.href = 'quiz.html'; 
        } 
    }; 
    
    window.navigateToProfile = function() { 
        window.location.href = 'profile.html'; 
    }; 
    
    window.navigateToModules = function() { 
        window.location.href = 'modules.html'; 
    }; 
}); 
 
Figure 4.10 Coding Snippets of Home Page Function 
 
III. Topics Section  
  
The topic selection page in MathAnywhere serves as the starting point for users 
to begin their learning journey. It is designed with a clean and structured layout, 
where users can choose topics by navigating through labeled tabs such as 
Section 1, Section 2, and Section 3. Each topic is displayed as an interactive 
card that features a title and relevant visual, making it easy for users to 
59 
 
recognize and select. The design ensures smooth navigation and promotes 
independent learning by allowing students to choose topics based on their 
interest or recommended path. This approach supports personalized learning, 
where users can access content at their own pace while maintaining clarity and 
engagement through an intuitive interface. Figure 4.11 shows the topics section 
where the students can engage with the topics and the content. 
 
 
Figure 4.11 Topics Section 
 
Figure 4.12 shows a HTML snippet creates a tab navigation interface using 
Bootstrap’s tab component. It features three tabs labelled "Section 1," 
"Section 2," and "Section 3." Each tab is represented by a button within 
a navigation list, and clicking a tab will display its corresponding content pane 
(not shown here). The first tab ("Section 1") is set as active by default. The 
structure uses Bootstrap classes and attributes (nav nav-tabs, data-bs-
toggle="tab", etc.) to enable interactive tab switching and 
accessibility features. 
 
<!-- HTML: Tab Navigation Structure from index.html --> 
<div class="container-fluid"> 
    <div class="row"> 
        <ul class="nav nav-tabs" id="myTab" role="tablist"> 
            <li class="nav-item" role="presentation"> 
                <button class="nav-link active" id="chapter1-
tab" data-bs-toggle="tab" 
                        data-bs-target="#chapter1-tab-pane" 
type="button" role="tab" 
                        aria-controls="chapter1-tab" aria-
selected="true">Section 1</button> 
            </li> 
60 
 
 
            <li class="nav-item" role="presentation"> 
                <button class="nav-link" id="marketing-tab" 
data-bs-toggle="tab" 
                        data-bs-target="#marketing-tab-pane" 
type="button" role="tab" 
                        aria-controls="marketing-tab-pane" 
aria-selected="false">Section 2</button> 
            </li> 
 
            <li class="nav-item" role="presentation"> 
                <button class="nav-link" id="finance-tab" 
data-bs-toggle="tab" 
                        data-bs-target="#finance-tab-pane" 
type="button" role="tab" 
                        aria-controls="finance-tab-pane" 
aria-selected="false">Section 3</button> 
            </li> 
        </ul> 
    </div> 
</div> 
 Figure 4.12 Coding Snippets of Module Page Function 
 
IV. Graphing Tool & Derivative Calculator 
  
The Graphing Tool in MathAnywhere is a dual-function feature that integrates 
both a Derivative Calculator and a Function Graph Generator. Users can input 
mathematical expressions using a LaTeX-style editor and immediately 
visualize the calculated derivative. The Derivative Calculator section 
simplifies the process of finding derivatives by offering pre-built mathematical 
buttons and instant results display. Meanwhile, the Function Graph Generator 
allows users to plot the original function alongside its derivative on a 
coordinate plane. This visualization enhances understanding by letting students 
compare function behavior and rate of change in real time. The tool is 
interactive, user-friendly, and visually clear, making it especially helpful for 
learners who benefit from graphical representation. It supports better 
conceptual learning by bridging symbolic computation with visual 
interpretation. 
 
61 
 
 
Figure 4.13 Derivative Calculator 
 
Figure 4.13 illustrates where it allows users to input mathematical expressions 
and instantly calculate the derivative in a clear and interactive format and figure 
4.14 enables users to plot mathematical functions and their derivative 
providing visual representation. 
 
 
Figure 4.14 Graphing Tool  
 
Figure 4.15 shows a function computes the derivative of a mathematical 
expression entered by the user. It first checks if the MathQuill input field is 
ready and contains input. The function then converts the LaTeX input to a 
math.js-compatible format, parses it, and calculates the derivative with respect 
to xx. The result is converted back to LaTeX, displayed on the page, 
and rendered using MathJax for proper mathematical formatting. Throughout 
the process, toast notifications provide feedback to the user about errors (such 
as missing input or invalid expressions) or confirm successful calculation. 
62 
 
 
function calculateDerivative() { 
    if (!derivativeField) { 
        showToast('Error', 'MathQuill not initialized', 
'error'); 
        return; 
    } 
    const latex = derivativeField.latex(); 
    if (!latex.trim()) { 
        showToast('Input Required', 'Please enter a function 
to differentiate', 'warning'); 
        return; 
    } 
    try { 
        // Convert LaTeX to math.js compatible format 
        const mathExpression = convertLatexToMathJS(latex); 
        console.log('Math expression:', mathExpression) 
        // Parse and differentiate 
        const parsedFunction = math.parse(mathExpression); 
        const derivative = math.derivative(parsedFunction, 
'x'); 
        
        // Convert result back to LaTeX 
        const resultLatex = 
convertMathJSToLatex(derivative.toString()); 
        
        // Display result 
      
document.getElementById('derivativeResult').style.display = 
'block'; 
        document.getElementById('derivativeLatex').innerHTML 
= `\\[${resultLatex}\\]`; 
        
        // Re-render MathJax 
        if (window.MathJax && window.MathJax.typesetPromise) 
{ 
            
window.MathJax.typesetPromise([document.getElementById('deri
vativeLatex')]); 
        } 
        showToast('Success!', 'Derivative calculated 
successfully', 'success'); 
        
    } catch (error) { 
        console.error('Derivative calculation error:', 
error); 
        showToast('Calculation Error', 'Invalid mathematical 
expression. Please check your input.', 'error'); 
    } 
} 
 
Figure 4.15 Coding Snippets of Derivative Calculator JavaScript Function 
 
Figure 4.16 shows a function generates a graph 
of a mathematical function entered by the user. It first checks if the MathQuill 
input field is initialized and contains input. The function then converts the 
63 
 
LaTeX input to a math.js-compatible format, compiles it, and evaluates the 
function at multiple points between -10 and 10 to generate x and y values. 
Only valid, finite results are used for plotting. If valid points are found, the 
function calls createChart to display the graph and shows the graph container. 
Throughout the process, toast notifications inform the user of errors 
(such as missing input or invalid expressions) or confirm successful graph 
generation. 
 
function generateGraph() { 
    if (!graphField) { 
        showToast('Error', 'MathQuill not initialized', 
'error'); 
        return; 
    } 
    const latex = graphField.latex(); 
    if (!latex.trim()) { 
        showToast('Input Required', 'Please enter a function 
to graph', 'warning'); 
        return; 
    } 
 
    try { 
        // Convert LaTeX to math.js compatible format 
        const mathExpression = convertLatexToMathJS(latex); 
        console.log('Graph expression:', mathExpression); 
 
 
        // Parse the expression 
        const expr = math.compile(mathExpression); 
        
        // Generate data points 
        const xValues = []; 
        const yValues = []; 
        
        for (let x = -10; x <= 10; x += 0.1) { 
            try { 
                const y = expr.evaluate({ x }); 
                if (isFinite(y) && !isNaN(y)) { 
                    xValues.push(x); 
                    yValues.push(y); 
                } 
            } catch (e) { 
                // Skip invalid points 
            } 
        } 
 
        if (xValues.length === 0) { 
            throw new Error('No valid points generated'); 
        } 
        createChart(xValues, yValues, `f(x) = ${latex}`, 
false); 
        
64 
 
        
document.getElementById('graphContainer').style.display = 
'block'; 
        showToast('Success!', 'Graph generated successfully', 
'success'); 
        
    } catch (error) { 
        console.error('Graph generation error:', error); 
        showToast('Graph Error', 'Unable to generate graph. 
Please check your function.', 'error'); 
    } 
} 
Figure 4.16 Coding Snippets of Graph Generation JavaScript Function 
 
V. Achievement Badges  
 
The Achievements system in MathAnywhere is designed to recognize and 
encourage user progress by awarding badges for completing specific learning 
tasks such as finishing modules, advancing through difficulty levels, or taking 
quizzes. This feature helps motivate users by providing a sense of 
accomplishment and clear indicators of their learning journey. It supports 
consistent learning habits and reinforces user commitment by highlighting 
milestones, which in turn helps build confidence and encourages continued 
effort. By visually tracking progress, the system also helps users understand 
their learning patterns and stay focused on their educational goals. Figure 4.17 
portrays the available Achievement badges. 
 
 
Figure 4.17 MathAnywhere Achievement Badges 
 
Figure 4.18 shows a function generates a list of achievement objects for a user 
based on their progress in various calculus modules. It checks the user's current 
65 
 
level and retrieves their module progress from session storage. The function 
defines several achievements such as "Novice Master," "Intermediate Master," 
"Advanced Master," and "Perfectionist"—each with an icon, title, description, 
and an "unlocked" status. The "Master" achievements are unlocked when the 
user completes all modules at a given level with at least 80% progress, while 
the "Perfectionist" achievement is unlocked by achieving 100% in any module. 
The function returns an array of these achievement objects, which can be 
used to display the user's accomplishments on their profile. 
 
function generateAchievements(userData) { 
    const level = userData.level || 
sessionStorage.getItem('level') || 'Beginner'; 
    const moduleProgress = 
JSON.parse(sessionStorage.getItem('moduleProgress') || '{}'); 
    const browseTopics = [ 
        'Introduction to derivatives', 
        'The definition of Derivative', 
        'Rules of Differentiation', 
        'Equation of Tangent', 
        'Second Derivative', 
        'Implicit Differentiations', 
        'Linear Approximation & Differentials' 
    ]; 
    const achievements = [ 
      { 
        icon: '🟢', 
        title: 'Novice Master', 
        description: 'Complete all Novice level modules', 
        unlocked: browseTopics.every(topic => 
(moduleProgress[`${topic} - Novice`] || 0) >= 80) 
      }, 
      { 
        icon: '🟡', 
        title: 'Intermediate Master', 
        description: 'Complete all Intermediate level 
modules', 
66 
 
        unlocked: browseTopics.every(topic => 
(moduleProgress[`${topic} - Intermediate`] || 0) >= 80) 
      }, 
      { 
        icon: '🔴', 
        title: 'Advanced Master', 
        description: 'Complete all Advanced level modules', 
        unlocked: browseTopics.every(topic => 
(moduleProgress[`${topic} - Advanced`] || 0) >= 80) 
      }, 
      { 
        icon: '💯', 
        title: 'Perfectionist', 
        description: 'Achieve 100% on any module', 
        unlocked: 
Object.values(moduleProgress).some(progress => progress >= 
100) 
      } 
    ]; 
    return achievements; 
} 
Figure 4.18 Coding Snippets of Achievement System 
 
VI. Learning Progress Bar  
  
The Learning Progress Bar in MathAnywhere provides users with a clear and 
organized view of their advancement through the platform. It displays both the 
overall course completion percentage and individual progress across difficulty 
levels—Novice, Intermediate, and Advanced. This breakdown helps learners 
visually track their achievements, understand how much content they’ve 
completed, and identify which areas still need attention. The progress bars are 
updated in real-time as users’ complete modules, offering continuous feedback 
and encouraging steady progression. By making progress visible, this feature 
supports self-monitoring and helps users stay motivated and goal-focused 
throughout their learning journey. Figure 4.19 and Figure 4.20 illustrate the 
overall student progress and detailed learning progress by difficulty level 
respectively showcasing how users can visually track their achievements. 
67 
 
 
 
Figure 4.19 Overall Student Progress 
 
 
Figure 4.20 Student Learning Progress by Difficulty Level  
 
Figure 4.21 shows function updates the user interface with the current user's 
information and progress. It displays the username and level, 
then calculates and updates progress for each difficulty level (Novice, 
Intermediate, Advanced) across all calculus topics. For each level, 
it determines how many modules have at least 80% completion, computes the 
average progress percentage, and updates the corresponding progress bar, 
percentage label, and completion details on the page. This provides users with 
a clear and visual summary of their achievements and progress in each module 
category. 
 
function updateUI(username, level, moduleProgress, 
overallProgress) { 
    // Update user info 
s    document.getElementById('username').textContent = 
username; 
    document.getElementById('level').textContent = `Level: 
${level}`; 
68 
 
    
    // Calculate progress for each difficulty level 
    const browseTopics = [ 
      'Introduction to derivatives', 
      'The definition of Derivative', 
      'Rules of Differentiation', 
      'Equation of Tangent', 
      'Second Derivative', 
      'Implicit Differentiations', 
      'Linear Approximation & Differentials' 
    ]; 
    
    const difficultyLevels = ['Novice', 'Intermediate', 
'Advanced']; 
    
    // Calculate progress for each difficulty level 
    difficultyLevels.forEach(difficulty => { 
      let completedModules = 0; 
      let totalProgress = 0; 
      
      browseTopics.forEach(topic => { 
        const moduleKey = `${topic} - ${difficulty}`; 
        const progress = moduleProgress[moduleKey] || 0; 
        totalProgress += progress; 
        if (progress >= 80) { 
          completedModules++; 
        } 
      }); 
      
      const averageProgress = Math.round(totalProgress / 
browseTopics.length); 
      const difficultyLower = difficulty.toLowerCase(); 
      
      // Update progress bar 
      document.getElementById(`${difficultyLower}-progress-
bar`).style.width = `${averageProgress}%`; 
      document.getElementById(`${difficultyLower}-progress-
percentage`).textContent = `${averageProgress}%`; 
      document.getElementById(`${difficultyLower}-
details`).textContent = `${completedModules} of 
${browseTopics.length} modules completed`; 
    }); 
} 
 
 Figure 4.21 Coding Snippets of Progress Update 
 
4.4 Testing 
  
The third objective was to assess the platform’s usability, interactivity, and the 
effectiveness of its feedback through user testing and expert evaluation of the 
MathAnywhere platform to ensure that all features and tools worked as 
intended. Testing was crucial to verify the platform's functionality, 
performance, reliability, and overall user experience. It aimed to identify 
69 
 
potential system issues, such as usability flaws or technical glitches, and ensure 
the platform's consistency.  
 
Furthermore, this phase provided valuable insights into how effectively the 
platform supported students in learning differentiation concepts, allowing for 
necessary improvements in design, interactivity, and instructional content. 
Table 4.1 lists the components that were evaluated during the testing process. 
Each component, including the interactive tutorials, real-time feedback system, 
graphing tool, and progress tracker, was thoroughly examined to confirm 
proper operation and alignment with the project’s objectives. The tests were 
conducted by the developer and simulated users based on predefined scenarios 
to ensure comprehensive evaluation from multiple perspectives. 
 
Table 4.1 Functionality Testing 
Functionality  Description  Testing Steps  Expected Result Pass/Fail 
Login Allows existing 
users to sign into 
their accounts 
Enter valid email 
and password 
User is logged in 
successfully and 
redirected to the home 
page  
Pass 
Enter Registered 
email with an 
incorrect password 
An “Invalid Password” 
error message is 
displayed  
Pass 
Enter an email that 
does not exist in the 
system 
A “User not found” 
error message is 
displayed  
Pass 
Sign up  Enables new users to 
create an account  
Enter a unique 
email, password and 
other required 
details. 
A new user account is 
created, and the user is 
logged in  
Pass 
Enter an email 
address that is 
already registered  
An “Email already in 
use” error message is 
displayed 
Pass 
Leave a required 
field (e.g., 
password) blank  
A validation message 
“Password is required” 
is shown  
Pass 
70 
 
Home Page  Displays the main 
landing page for 
logged-in users  
Access the home 
page after logging in  
The page displays a 
“where do I start” button 
to begin a placement 
quiz  
Pass 
Clicks on the 
“Topics” navigation 
link. 
The user is redirected to 
the Topics Section Page 
Pass 
User were taken to 
the Profile page as 
returning with an 
assigned level 
The page displays user’s 
progress  
and available modules  
Pass 
Topics 
Section  
Lists all available 
learning topics  
Navigate to the 
topics page  
All available topics 
Are displayed as cards  
Pass 
  Click on a specific 
topic card (e.g., The 
Definition of 
Derivative). 
The user is taken to the 
main page for that 
learning module   
Pass 
Derivative 
Calculator 
A tool to compute 
the derivative of a 
function  
Enter a standard 
function 
(e.g., y =3 𝑥  ) 
The correct derivative 
and steps are calculated 
and displayed  
Pass  
Enter an invalid 
expression  
(e.g., abc+xyz) 
An “Invalid input 
syntax” error message is 
displayed  
Pass 
Graphing 
Tool  
A tool to visualize 
functions and their 
derivatives  
Enter a function to 
plot  
(e.g., y = sin(x)) 
The graph is correctly 
rendered  
Pass 
Achievement 
Badges 
Rewards users with 
badges for 
completing modules  
Successfully 
complete all quizzes 
in a topic for the 
first time 
A new badge is added to 
their profile  
Pass 
Navigate to the user 
profile page  
All earned badges are 
displayed in a dedicated 
“Achievements” section  
Pass 
Learning 
Progress bar  
Visually tracks a 
user’s completion of 
modules  
Complete one of 
three modules in a 
topic  
The progress bar for that 
level updates to show 
completion  
Pass 
71 
 
Complete all 
modules and 
learning paths  
The topic is marked as 
completed and the 
progress bar for overall 
progress shows 100% 
Pass 
 
4.5 Expert Feedback  
  
The expert feedback was obtained from Dr. Mohamad Hidayad bin Ahmad 
Kamal, a senior lecturer from the Faculty of Computer and Mathematical 
Sciences (FSKM) who was invited to review the MathAnywhere platform from 
a professional and pedagogical perspective. Dr. Hidayad was provided with 
access to the platform and encouraged to explore its features, structure, and 
content in depth, simulating the experience of an educational evaluator. After 
this exploration, he completed a Google Form survey specifically designed to 
capture expert insights on key aspects such as the platform’s instructional 
design, technical implementation, user interface, and potential for educational 
impact. The targeted questions in the survey ensured that the feedback was 
both detailed and relevant, providing valuable guidance for the ongoing 
development and refinement of MathAnywhere. 
 
 
Figure 4.22 Overall Impression based on Expert 
 
Figure 4.22 presents expert feedback from Dr. Mohamad Hidayad bin Ahmad 
Kamal regarding his overall impression of the MathAnywhere platform. Dr. 
Hidayad notes that MathAnywhere provides a positive learning 
experience by teaching differentiation from different perspectives compared to 
traditional techniques. He highlights that the platform enables users to 
approach and understand differentiation in new and varied ways, which 
enriches the learning process and offers a broader conceptual grasp of the 
72 
 
subject. This expert insight underscores MathAnywhere’s value in 
delivering innovative and effective calculus instruction. 
 
 
Figure 4.23 Evaluation of the pedagogical structure employed by MathAnywhere 
 
Figure 4.23 displays Dr. Mohamad Hidayad bin Ahmad Kamal’s evaluation of 
the pedagogical structure employed by MathAnywhere, which organizes 
content into Novice, Intermediate, and Advanced levels. Dr. Hidayad rated the 
effectiveness of this tiered approach as a 4 out of 5, indicating a strong 
endorsement of the platform’s ability to support learning in calculus through 
progressive difficulty levels. This feedback suggests that the structured 
progression is seen as a valuable feature, helping learners build their 
understanding step by step while accommodating different skill levels within 
the subject. 
 
 
Figure 4.24 Recommendation for future improvement of the MathAnywhere platform  
 
Figure 4.24 presents Dr. Mohamad Hidayad bin Ahmad Kamal’s 
recommendation for future improvement of the MathAnywhere platform. Dr. 
Hidayad points out that the differentiation calculator currently lacks 
compatibility with all types of functions. Some complex functions cannot be 
73 
 
calculated accurately, which limits the tool's flexibility and usefulness. 
Enhancing the calculator’s capabilities in future versions will allow it to 
support a wider range of mathematical expressions and improve its overall 
effectiveness.  
 
 
Figure 4.25 Feedback regarding on how well MathAnywhere addresses the needs of its target audience  
 
Figure 4.25 summarizes Dr. Mohamad Hidayad bin Ahmad 
Kamal’s assessment of how well MathAnywhere addresses the needs of its 
target audience, including both students and educators. Dr. Hidayad notes that 
the platform is effective in covering differentiation topics that are well-aligned 
with the syllabus, ensuring its relevance for academic use. Additionally, he 
highlights the value of MathAnywhere’s interactive and visual tools, which 
provide engaging ways for users to explore and understand differentiation 
concepts. This feedback underscores the platform’s strengths in both 
curriculum alignment and the provision of dynamic learning resources. 
  
4.6 User Feedback  
 
The user feedback involved a group of 20 students, with a majority aged 
between 15 and 23. The participants were randomly selected from students who 
were interested in learning differentiation, ensuring a variety of backgrounds 
and learning levels. They were required to explore and interact with the 
MathAnywhere platform independently, with minimal guidance, to simulate a 
real-user experience. Following their interaction, they completed a Google 
Form survey designed to assess their experience. The survey gathered feedback 
on various aspects of the platform, including functionality, educational value, 
ease of use, and overall satisfaction. The straightforward questions in the 
74 
 
Google Form ensured that the responses were both comprehensible and 
valuable for evaluating the platform’s usability and effectiveness. 
 
Section 1: About the User  
 
This section captures the basic demographic information, including the gender 
and age of each student participating in the user testing. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.26 Gender and Age Distribution 
 
Figure 4.26 presents the demographic breakdown of the user feedback 
collected from 20 participants. The age group chart reveals that most 
respondents (85%) fall within the 18–23 age range, which closely matches the 
intended audience of UiTM students for the MathAnywhere platform. Smaller 
proportions are represented by those aged 24–30 (10%) and above 30 (5%), 
with no participants under 18. The gender distribution indicates that 70% of 
respondents are male and 30% are female. This demographic profile suggests 
that the feedback primarily reflects the experiences and perspectives of young 
adult learners, with a notable male majority, providing valuable insights into 
the platform’s usability and appeal among its core target users. 
 
75 
 
 
Figure 4.27 Participants reference for using educational websites  
 
Figure 4.27 displays the participants’ preferences regarding the use of 
educational websites for learning. The data shows that a substantial majority 
75% of respondents incorporate educational websites into their learning 
routines, with 45% using them “frequently” and 30% “occasionally.” An 
additional 20% reported using such resources “rarely,” while only a small 
fraction (5%) indicated that they do not use educational websites at all. These 
results suggest that most participants are already comfortable with and 
receptive to online learning tools, highlighting a strong potential user base and 
confirming the relevance of platforms like MathAnywhere for supporting their 
educational needs. 
 
  
76 
 
Section 2: Using the App 
 
This section assesses the core usability and user experience of the 
MathAnywhere platform. The evaluation focuses on the user's journey from 
their initial entry into the site to their interaction with key features. It aims to 
identify any friction points in the user flow and to verify that the platform's 
design is both intuitive and effective. 
 
 
Figure 4.28 User feedback on the intuitiveness of MathAnywhere 
 
Figure 4.28 displays the results of user feedback regarding the intuitiveness of 
the MathAnywhere interface, as rated on a scale from 1 to 5. All 20 participants 
rated the interface highly, with 55% awarding the maximum score of 5 and the 
remaining 45% selecting a score of 4. Notably, there were no ratings below 4, 
indicating unanimous agreement among participants that the platform is easy 
to navigate without assistance. This strong positive response underscores the 
effectiveness of MathAnywhere’s user interface design, suggesting that users 
find the platform straightforward and accessible, which is essential for 
supporting independent learning. 
 
  
77 
 
Section 3: Learning  
 
This section evaluates the educational effectiveness and engagement of the 
MathAnywhere platform. Its primary focus is to determine whether the 
platform succeeds as a learning tool and fulfills its core objective of enhancing 
students' comprehension of differentiation. 
 
 
Figure 4.29 User Feedback on Content Alignment with UiTM Syllabus 
 
Figure 4.29 illustrates user feedback on the extent to which MathAnywhere 
enables students to study specific differentiation topics aligned with the UiTM 
syllabus. All 20 participants rated this aspect highly, with 60% giving the 
maximum score of 5 and the remaining 40% selecting a score of 4. There were 
no ratings below 4, indicating unanimous agreement that the platform’s content 
is closely aligned with the required syllabus topics. This strong positive 
response highlights MathAnywhere’s effectiveness as a supplementary 
learning resource tailored to the academic needs of UiTM students. 
 
78 
 
 
Figure 4.30 User Feedback on the Speed of MathAnywhere compared to Traditional textbooks 
 
Figure 4.30 presents user feedback on whether MathAnywhere is significantly 
faster than using traditional textbooks, rated on a scale from 1 to 5. Most 
participants (55%) awarded the highest score of 5, indicating they found the 
platform much faster, while an additional 20% rated it a 4. Another 20% gave 
a neutral score of 3, and only one participant (5%) rated it a 2; no participants 
selected the lowest score of 1. These results suggest that most users perceive 
MathAnywhere as a more efficient and accessible learning tool compared to 
traditional textbooks, with a strong overall preference for the platform’s speed 
and convenience. 
 
 
Figure 4.31 User Feedback on the Clarity of Step-by-Step Explanations  
 
Figure 4.31 presents user feedback on the clarity and ease of following the step-
by-step derivative explanations offered by MathAnywhere. All 20 participants 
79 
 
rated this aspect positively, with 55% giving the highest score of 5 and 45% 
selecting a score of 4. Notably, there were no ratings below 4, indicating 
unanimous satisfaction with the quality of the explanations. This strong positive 
consensus suggests that the platform’s instructional content is well-
structured and accessible, effectively helping users understand and follow the 
process of solving derivative problems step by step. 
 
Section 4: Overall Experience  
 
This section assesses the overall engagement of the students with 
MathAnywhere website and captures how they are to recommend the website to 
other UiTM students. 
 
 
Figure 4.32 User Likelihood of Recommending MathAnywhere 
 
Figure 4.32 reflects participants’ willingness to recommend 
MathAnywhere to other Calculus I students. The results are overwhelmingly 
positive, with 90% of respondents indicating “Yes,” they would 
enthusiastically recommend the platform, and the remaining 10% selecting 
“Maybe.” Notably, no participants chose “No.” This strong endorsement 
highlights a high level of user satisfaction and confidence in the platform’s 
value, suggesting that most users not only benefited from MathAnywhere 
themselves but also recognize its potential to support and enhance the learning 
experience of their peers. 
 
80 
 
4.7 Conclusion 
 
This chapter provided the description of the successful design, implementation, 
and testing of the MathAnywhere platform, demonstrating its effectiveness 
and appeal to students of calculus. The project design phase focused on 
creating a clear structure and a user-friendly interface to ensure an intuitive 
learning environment. During development, standard web technologies 
including HTML, CSS, and JavaScript were utilized to build the platform, 
while Firebase was implemented to manage real-time data and user 
authentication.The testing phase validated the platform’s functionality and user 
experience, revealing that it was well-received, intuitive, and highly engaging. 
Feedback from the user acceptability testing highlighted the platform's 
success in enhancing students' comprehension of differentiation, with a high 
percentage of participants expressing satisfaction and a unanimous willingness 
to recommend the platform to their peers. Overall, the MathAnywhere 
platform effectively met its objectives, providing a valuable educational tool 
for students. 
 
   
81 
 
CHAPTER 5 
 
 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION FOR FUTURE 
WORK 
 
 
5.1 Introduction  
  
This chapter will end the development discourse of the project MathAnywhere: 
Interactive Website for Learning Differentiation by speculating the overall 
results of the project, evaluating the success of each goal remained, the 
encountered restrictions, and forthcoming advancement. It is also noted in the 
chapter that the project is important in assisting students to develop knowledge 
in differentiation and how it can be useful in the learning of mathematics 
particularly in the study of calculus. 
 
5.2 Summary of Findings 
 
The development of MathAnywhere site has successfully solved the limitations 
encountered by students in terms of learning differentiation at using the 
common ways of doing it. The embedded tutoring system and real-time 
questioning and quizzes, interactive graphing tools, and progress monitoring 
can be customized to ensure that the site encourages conceptual learning in a 
more interactive and approachable manner. The positive responses by 20 user 
reports aged between 18-23, revealed that the feedback was overwhelmingly 
favourable with many rating the site at the top when it came to ease of interface, 
the interface aligned with the UiTM syllabus and the parsing of the step-by-
step explanations. More users also thought that MathAnywhere was easy to use 
and more successful than conventional textbooks and expressed their high 
interest to recommend to other students. 
 
The effectiveness of the platform as an education tool was confirmed by the 
expert reviews which particularly appealed to its ability to present numerous 
82 
 
approaches and facilitate the progressive development by its levels structure. 
The experimenter approved it’s as a promising additional teaching aid and 
talked about modifications in the differentiation calculator. Comprehensively, 
these study results indicate that MathAnywhere is an effective means of 
improving the understanding of differentiation among students and that it 
possesses great prospects both as a resource for student- and teacher-centered 
learning as well as teacher-supportive software. 
 
5.3 Objective Achievement 
 
5.3.1 First Objective  
 
The first objective was to design an interactive web-based educational platform 
for studying differentiation and this was accomplished by creating an interface 
that is user-friendly and aesthetically appealing and enables the user to navigate 
through modules easily so that the students can access the lessons, quizzes, 
graphing tools and track progress without difficulties. Besides the interface, the 
design involved the extensive system planning by utilizing use case diagrams 
and flowcharts, which described user interactions, authentication procedures, 
primary application logic, and progress tracking. These design features 
provided a structured and easy to understand system architecture, which can 
support an interactive and easy to learn experience that fits the needs of the 
students. 
   
5.3.2 Second Objective 
 
The second objective is to develop an interactive web-based educational 
platform for studying differentiation that provides tailored feedback according 
to student performance. This objective was accomplished by implementing 
real-time feedback in the quizzes, a progress tracking dashboard, and an 
adaptive topic suggestion feature. The system evaluates students' performance 
and recommends topics that need improvement, providing personalized 
learning support based on individual progress. 
83 
 
 
5.3.3 Third Objective 
  
The third objective is to assess the platform’s usability, interactivity, and 
effectiveness of the feedback provided through user testing and expert 
evaluation. This was done by carrying out testing with 20 participant users and 
one expert reviewer, with the following areas of concern: ease of use, well-
designed interface, real-time feedback, and general learning experience. The 
findings showed that students considered the platform quite user-friendly and 
engaging, and the explanations were clear, and the platform aligned well with 
the UiTM syllabus. Moreover, most of them were highly satisfied and ready to 
recommend the platform to others. The professional responses also confirmed 
the platform advantages in terms of offering interactive learning and 
emphasized its potential as an additional teaching tool. These results validate 
the fact that the platform was able to achieve its objectives of providing an 
effective and supportive learning platform to study differentiation. 
 
5.4 Limitation  
 
The existing platform has been mainly developed and fine-tuned to use desktop 
browsers, where the screen size is larger, and the interaction is more convenient 
using a keyboard and a mouse. Consequently, it has not undergone rigorous 
testing, nor has it been optimized fully to fit in smaller devices like tablets and 
smartphones. Those students who use the platform on these devices could 
experience some issues such as poorly aligned interface elements, text or 
buttons that cannot be tapped with precision, overlapping content, and the 
inability to use interactive tools such as the graphing tool or MathQuill input 
fields. Such problems may have a negative effect on user experience, making 
it less user-friendly and easier to navigate on mobile. This limitation might 
limit accessibility, engagement, and overall effectiveness of the system in 
supporting a diverse range of learners because many students would like to 
have the flexibility of learning on their phones or tablets. 
 
84 
 
Additionally, according to the reviews of expert, the derivative calculator is not 
yet compatible with all the types of mathematical functions, and some 
complicated expressions cannot be processed with its help. This drawback 
decreases the flexibility of the calculator and can limit its effectiveness when 
students must solve more complex or diverse differentiation tasks. Overcoming 
this shortcoming in future improvement would contribute to the reliability of 
the platform and its educational worth even more. 
 
5.5 Recommendation  
  
Based on the findings and the limitations encountered during development and 
evaluation, the following recommendations are proposed to enhance the 
effectiveness, scope, and usability of the MathAnywhere website: 
 
 Increase the scope of the curriculum. Make the platform go beyond 
differentiation into other fundamentals of calculus like integration, 
limits, and applications of derivatives to make it more of a resourceful 
learning tool. 
 Enhance adaptive learning, Improve the recommendation engine so that 
it can sift deeper into performance data and delivers even more 
customised learning paths and tailored practice. 
 Improve accessibility. Include options such as multilingual 
functionality, changing font sizes, using high-contrast modes, and 
screen-reader accessibility so that all learners with varied needs will be 
catered. 
 Deal with mobile compatibility. Enhance usability and accessibility 
using smaller devices; optimize tablet and smartphone interface and 
functionalities. 
 Improve calculator capability. Expand the scope of mathematical 
functions of the differentiation calculator and make it more reliable and 
helpful with solving complex problems involving calculus. 
 Introduce collaborative tools. Include discussion forums, peer-
reviewing activities or group problem-solving tasks in your course to 
85 
 
promote communication and knowledge-building collectively and a 
sense of belonging. 
 Iterate on UI/UX design. Make the interface dynamic by periodically 
refining the feedback by modifying the layout, graphics and the 
interaction styles to make it interesting, current and convenient to use. 
 
5.6 Conclusion 
  
The MathAnywhere: Interactive Learning Website for Learning Differentiation 
has proven to be efficient in addressing major challenges that students 
encounter upon learning differentiation. The combination of interactive 
tutorials, real-time feedback quizzes, dynamic graphing tools, and progress 
tracking allows creating an empowering learning experience that is rich, 
adaptive, and encourages the learner to learn the material at his/her pace and 
concentrate his/her efforts on his/her weak spots. All three project goals of 
designing an intuitive web interface, using performance-based feedback and 
user testing the effectiveness of the learning process have been achieved, and 
the final product is a system allowing students to discover the conceptual 
foundation and stay motivated in the process of learning. 
 
Regardless of the barriers, like the fact that the current focus of the project is 
only on the topics of differentiation, it has a solid ground to expand and grow 
in the future. Comprehensive, inclusive learning tool can be achieved with 
suggested improvements in calculus coverage, superior adaptive algorithms, 
and accessibility, additional collaboration features, and continuous UI 
improvements. In conclusion, MathAnywhere becomes an excellent addition 
to and alternative to conventional teaching because it provides confidence and 
competency in calculus, as well as being a product that could be expanded to 
an all-purpose learning tool in the teaching of mathematics.  
  
86 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Aguirre Acosta, A. C., & Espinola Carballo, G. (2022). The Use of Immersive Tools 
in Higher Education: Escape Rooms. ACM International Conference 
Proceeding Series, 75–80.  
 
Aini Jaafar, N., Rohani, S., Nor, M., Norrulashikin, S. M., Arina, N., Kamisan, B., 
& Mohamad, A. Q. (2022). Increase Students’ Understanding of Mathematics 
Learning Using the Technology-Based Learning. In International Journal of 
Advanced Research in Future Ready Learning and Education (Vol. 28). 
 
Almeida, F., & Bálint, B. (2024). Approaches for Hybrid Scaling of Agile in the IT 
Industry: A Systematic Literature Review and Research Agenda. In 
Information (Switzerland) (Vol. 15, Issue 10). Multidisciplinary Digital 
Publishing Institute (MDPI).  
 
Anselme, P., & Hidi, S. E. (2024). Acquiring competence from both extrinsic and 
intrinsic rewards. Learning and Instruction, 92.  
 
Barana, A., Marchisio, M., & Sacchet, M. (2021). Interactive feedback for learning 
mathematics in a digital learning environment. Education Sciences, 11(6).  
 
Behrens, A., Ofori, M., Noteboom, C., & Bishop, D. (2021). A systematic literature 
review: how agile is agile project management? Issues in Information Systems, 
22(3), 278–295.  
 
Biza, I., González-Martín, A. S., & Pinto, A. (2022). ‘Scaffolding’ or ‘Filtering’: A 
Review of Studies on the Diverse Roles of Calculus Courses for Students, 
Professionals and Teachers. International Journal of Research in 
Undergraduate Mathematics Education, 8(2), 389–418.  
 
Boulaaras, S., Jan, R., & Pham, V. T. (2023). Recent advancement of fractional 
calculus and its applications in physical systems. In European Physical 
Journal: Special Topics (Vol. 232, Issues 14–15, pp. 2347–2350). Springer 
Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH.  
 
Chechan, B., Ampadu, E., & Pears, A. (2023). Effect of using Desmos on high 
school students’ understanding and learning of functions. Eurasia Journal of 
Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 19(10).  
 
Chen, Y., Preston, J. C., & Li, Y. (2025). Enhancing Collaboration and Critical 
Thinking in CSCL Environments: The Interplay Between Team Dynamics and 
Pedagogical Innovation. International Journal of E-Collaboration, 21(1).  
 
Ely, R. (2021). Teaching calculus with infinitesimals and differentials. ZDM - 
Mathematics Education, 53(3), 591–604.  
 
Fazwan Kharuddin, A., Azid, N., Razak, A., Lumpur, K., & SMK Jeram, M. (2021). 
Mathematics and Technology Integrated Education in Malaysia. In 
International Journal of Management, Accounting (Vol. 1, Issue 1). 
87 
 
 
Firdaus, M., Mukhtar, Darari, M. B., & Azis, Z. (2021). Designing Interactive 
Videos in Online Multivariable Calculus Course to Support Student’s Critical 
Thinking. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1819(1).  
 
Garcia, R., Treude, C., & Valentine, A. (2024). Application of Collaborative 
Learning Paradigms within Software Engineering Education: A Systematic 
Mapping Study. SIGCSE 2024 - Proceedings of the 55th ACM Technical 
Symposium on Computer Science Education, 1, 366–372.  
 
Ghimire, D., & Charters, S. (2022). The Impact of Agile Development Practices on 
Project Outcomes. Software, 1(3), 265–275.  
 
Grizzle, J. (2025). Calculus for the Modern Engineer: Putting the Joy Back in 
Learning Advanced Mathematics.  
 
Hajizada, E., Berggold, P., Iacono, M., Glover, A., & Sandamirskaya, Y. (2022, July 
27). Interactive continual learning for robots: a neuromorphic approach. ACM 
International Conference Proceeding Series.  
 
Hoy, Z., & Xu, M. (2023). Agile Software Requirements Engineering Challenges-
Solutions—A Conceptual Framework from Systematic Literature Review. In 
Information (Switzerland) (Vol. 14, Issue 6). MDPI.  
 
Jamaluddin, J., Mahali, M., Din, N. M., Ahmad, M. A. N., Jabar, F. A., Fadzillah, N. 
S. M., & Malek, M. A. A. (2017). A comparison of students’ performance in 
gamification approach versus conventional approach of accounting teaching 
and learning. Advanced Science Letters, 23(8), 7733–7736.  
 
Li, M., Ma, S., & Shi, Y. (2023). Examining the effectiveness of gamification as a 
tool promoting teaching and learning in educational settings: a meta-analysis. 
In Frontiers in Psychology (Vol. 14). Frontiers Media SA.  
 
Ming Chew, Y., Shien, K. N., & Eng, P. C. (2022). GAMIFICATION TOOLS IN 
MATHEMATICS COURSE: STUDENTS’ ACCEPTANCE. In Borneo 
Akademika (Vol. 6, Issue 2). 
 
Nakamoto, R., Flanagan, B., Dai, Y., Yamauchi, T., Takami, K., & Ogata, H. (2023). 
Enhancing Self-Explanation Learning through a Real-Time Feedback System: 
An Empirical Evaluation Study. Sustainability (Switzerland), 15(21).  
 
Neumann, M., & Diebold, P. (2024). Towards A Double-Edged Sword: Modelling 
the Impact in Agile Software Development.  
 
Nur, W., Wan, S., Rosly, M., Sarimah, S., Abdullah, S., Norsyiha, F., & Shukri, A. 
(2020). The uses of Wolfram Alpha in Mathematics. In Articles of Teaching 
and Learning in Higher Education (Vol. 1). https://www.wolframalpha.com/, 
 
Nurbekova, Z., Nurbekov, B., Maulsharif, M., Naimanova, D., & Baimendinova, A. 
(2022). Using Virtual Learning Objects in Educational Content. ACM 
International Conference Proceeding Series, 174–178.  
88 
 
 
Tah Jutin, N., & Binti Maat, S. M. (2024). The Effectiveness of Gamification in 
Teaching and Learning Mathematics: A Systematic Literature Review. 
International Journal of Academic Research in Progressive Education and 
Development, 13(1).  
 
Thompson, P. W., & Harel, G. (2021). Ideas foundational to calculus learning and 
their links to students’ difficulties. ZDM - Mathematics Education, 53(3), 507–
519.  
 
Tian, T. W., & Wahid, N. (2024). Development of a Mobile Learning Application 
for Form 5 Mathematics with a Gamification Approach. Applied Information 
Technology And Computer Science, 5(1), 335–354.  
 
Torres-Peña, R. C., Peña-González, D., Chacuto-López, E., Ariza, E. A., & Vergara, 
D. (2024). Updating Calculus Teaching with AI: A Classroom Experience. 
Education Sciences, 14(9).  
 
ULUM, H. (2023). The Impact of Khan Academy Learning Platform on 
Mathematics Achievement in Primary School Fourth Grade Students. 
Necatibey Eğitim Fakültesi Elektronik Fen ve Matematik Eğitimi Dergisi, 
17(Özel Sayı), 530–552.  
 
Zaharin, F. Z., Suriya, N., Karim, A., Adenan, N. H., Wahida, N., Junus, M., Tarmizi, 
R. A., Zila, N., Hamid, A., & Latib, L. A. (2021). Gamification in Mathematics: 
Students’ Perceptions in Learning Perimeter and Area. 11.  
 
Zhou, Q., Suraworachet, W., & Cukurova, M. (2024). Harnessing Transparent 
Learning Analytics for Individualized Support through Auto-detection of 
Engagement in Face-to-Face Collaborative Learning. ACM International 
Conference Proceeding Series, 392–403.  
 
